Minutes of the 20th meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards,
Notification and Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops held under the
Chairmanship of Dr. N. K. Krishna Kumar, Deputy Director General (Hort), ICAR
at KAB-II, Pusa New Delhi
The 20th meeting of the Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification
and Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops was held under the Chairmanship of
Dr. N. K. Krishnakumar, Deputy Director General (Hort.), Indian Council of
Agricultural Research on 04.06.2013 at 10.00 AM in the Committee Room, Krishi
Anusandhan Bhavan-II, Pusa, New Delhi. The list of participants is enclosed
(Annexure-I).
The Chairman, Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and
Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops welcomed the members of the
Committee and special invitees for the meeting. He commended that the Secretariat
of the Sub-Committee had timely issued the Minutes of the 19th meeting of the
Central Sub-Committee and also uploaded the same on the website of DAC. He
emphasized that proposals for release/notification of varieties should be submitted
immediately after identification of the proposal in the ICAR workshop, so that the
Secretariat of the Sub-Committee has reasonable time to examine the proposal. He
suggested that the concerned breeder should make a presentation (about 10 minutes)
on the performance of variety in 8-10 slides before the Committee. He expressed that
the breeder seed of the variety must be available with the sponsoring agency and a
DNA finger print along with a glossy photograph of varieties be submitted along
with the proposal.
The seed samples of the concerned variety also need to be submitted to NBPGR
for registration and accession number. He further emphasized that
Breeders/Institutions also submit the de-notification proposals for the old and
obsolete varieties. He was of the opinion that the representatives of private seed
industry may also attend the Sub-Committee meeting as special invitees. The ADG
(Seeds) was advised to attend the Horticultural Crop Sub-Committee meeting as a
special invitee. The Deputy Commissioner (QC) and Member Secretary of the Central
Sub-Committee informed that the specific actions have been taken on deferred
proposals of previous meetings in consultation with the concerned breeders PC/PD
and after removing various discrepancies the proposals have been included in the
Agenda Note for this meeting. Thereafter, Member Secretary of the Sub-Committee
presented the Agenda items for consideration of the Sub-Committee.
Item No. 1: Conformation of minutes of the 19th Meeting of Central Sub-
Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties for
Horticultural Crops held on 24th July, 2012 in Krishi Anusandhan Bhavan,
New Delhi.
The minutes of the 19th Meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards,
Notification and Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops were confirmed. The
Sub-Committee noted that the Gazette Notification S.O. No. 2363 € dated 4th October,
2012 was issued for cultivars recommended in the 19th Meeting of Sub-Committee for
release/notification.
Item No. 2: Review of follow up action of the 19th Meeting of Central Sub-
Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties for
Horticultural Crops held on 24th July, 2012.
The Sub-Committee approved the notification of Bottle gourd (hybrid) c.v.
Santosh (Santosh 20) (KBGH 20) which was considered in the 18th Meeting of the
Sub-Committee but kept in abeyance for want of information regarding the seed
production methodology, source of parents, mode of development, parentage details
and its genesis. The required information has now been received from the concerned
breeder.
The following varieties which were deferred earlier and re-submitted for
consideration have not been recommended by the Sub-Committee. The Committee
desired that the concerned breeders should make presentations about the
performance of varieties in 8-10 slides before the Sub-Committee for consideration.
Sl. Crop Variety Remarks
No.
1 Ginger Karthika Information of quantified morphological
characteristics required.
2. Carrot Solan Rachna AICRP trial data on pests and diseases
required
3. Coconut Kalpatharu (IND Performance of proposed hybrid is
125S) inferior to check variety in terms of copra
and oil yield
4. Coconut Kalpa Samrudhi Information regarding name of the States
(IND 376) covered under the zones West Coast
region and North East region required
5. Ashgourd Kashi Surbhi The NBPGR certificate and details on
(IVAG-03) morphological characters required
The Chairman advised the Secretariat to scrutinize the proposals thoroughly
considering adaptability, special quality, details of resistance to biotic and abiotic
stresses, usage and in the remarks with respect to each column against each variety
should be appropriately mentioned in Agenda Note and Minutes.
Item No. 3: Proposals for release and notification for consideration of the 20th
meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and
Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops.
The following proposals were received for discussion and consideration in the
20th Meeting of the Sub-Committee for release/notification (central verities). It was
decided that the release and notification of the following varieties be deferred for the
reasons noted against each variety as below-
Sl.No. Crop Variety Sponsoring authority Remarks
1. Onion Bhima Shakti (NRCR Directorate of Onion and The
02/1156) Garlic Research, concerned
Rajgurunagar breeder
2. Arecanut NALBARI (VTL 75) Central Plantation Crops should make
Research Institute, presentation
Kasaragod. (10 minutes)
3. Arecanut Madhuramangala, Central Plantation Crops on the
VTL (Shriwardhan 1) Research Institute, performance
Kasaragod. of variety in
8-10 slides
before the
Committee
Item No. 4: Proposals for notification (state varieties) for consideration of the 20th
meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and
Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops.
The following proposals were received for discussion and consideration in the
20th Meeting of the Sub-Committee for notification (state varieties). The Sub-
Committee deferred the following varieties ((state varieties) for notification with the
remarks as under-
Sl Crop Name of variety Sponsoring Remarks
authority
1 Brinjal HBL-12 (Hisar Bahar) CCS Haryana The concerned
Agricultural breeder should
University, Hisar make
presentation (10
2. Tomato Solan Red Round Horticulture
minutes) on the
(Kandaghat Cherry Research Station,
performance of
Tomato-1) Kandaghat
variety in 8-10
3. French bean Solan Naina (UHF-B- Dr. Y.S. Parmer
slides before the
11) University of
Committee
Horticulture and
Forestry, Solan
4. Frech bean Palam Mridula Hill Agricultural
Research and
Extension Centre,
Bajaura and CSK
HP Krishi
Vishvavidyalaya,
Palampur - 176062
5. Vegetable AV-5 University of
Cowpea Agricultural
Science,
Bangalore- 65
6 Garden Pea Palam triloki CSK, HP Krishi
Vishvavidyalaya,
Palampur
7 Garde Pea Palam Sumool CSK, HP Krishi
Vishvavidyalaya,
Palampur
8 Cauliflower Sabour Agrim Bihar Agricultural
(SBECF-01/09) University, Sabour
9 Knol Khol Pusa Virat IARI, Regional
Station, Katrain,
Himachal Pradesh
10 Colocasia Jorhat Ahina (Ahina Assam
Kachu) Agricultural
University,
Guwahati
11 Mango Chhattisgarh Indira Gandhi
Nandiraj Krishi
Vishwavidyalaya,
Raipur
12 Jackfruit Swarna Halasu University of
Agricultural
Science,
Bangalore- 65
13 Coconut Kahikuchi Coconut Assam
Hybrid-1(MYD x agricultural
WCT) University,
Guwahati
14 Coconut Kamrupa (Assam Assam
Green Tall) Agricultural
University,
Guwahati
15 Oyster Indira Sweta Indira Gandhi
Mushroom Krishi
Vishwavidyalaya,
Raipur
16 Coriander Pratap Raj Dhania-1 Agricultural
(RKD-18) Research Station,
Kota.
Item No. 5: Furnishing the package of practices of cultivars.
The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation desired that NSC, SFCI and
State Seeds Corporation mention the average yield performance on labels of seed
packets along with details on package of practices for the Rabi 2013 onwards. In this
context, it was also decided that all breeders/sponsoring institutions will provide
package of practices for the cultivars along with release/notification proposals.
It was decided that the next meeting of the Central Sub-Committee on Crop
Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops should be
convened in the month of August, 2013.
The meeting ended with vote of thanks to the Chair.
Annexure-I
List of participants of the 20th Meeting of Central Sub-Committee on
Crop Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops
held under the Chairmanship of Dr. N.K. Krishna Kumar, Deputy Director
General (Hort.), ICAR, KAB-II, New Delhi.
1. Dr. N.K. Krishna Kumar, DDG (Horticulture), lCAR, New Delhi
2. Shri. R. K. Trivedi, DC (QC), DAC, New Delhi.
3. Dr. S. K. Malhotra, ADG (Horticulture), lCAR, New Delhi.
4. Dr. K. C. Bansal, Director, NBPGR, Pusa, New Delhi.
5. Dr. A. S. Siddhu, Director, lIHR, Bangalore.
6. Dr. P. S. Naik, Director, IIVR, Varanasi.
7. Dr. R. B. Gupta, Director, NHRDF, Nasik
8. Dr. James George, Project Coordinator (Tuber Crops), CTCRI, Trivandram.
9. Dr. B. Singh, Project Coordinator (Vegetable Crops), IIVR, Varanasi
10. Dr. P. L. Maliwal, Director, MPUAT, Udaipur.
10. Shri L. Shivarama Reddy, OSD (Horticulture), DAC, New Delhi.
11. Shri B. M. Sahare, MD, MP State Seed Certification Agency, Bhopal.
12. Shri O. C. Verma, Director, Himachal Pradesh State Seed and Organic Produce
Certification Agency, Shimla.
13. Shri. Jayant Deshmukh, Director, Maharashtra State Seed Certification Agency,
Akola.
15. Shri A. K. Bishnoi, Director, UPSSCA, Lucknow.
16. Shri. Baburam, UPSSCA, Meerut.
17. Dr. S. S. Siwach, Director of Research, CCSHAU, Hisar.
18. Shri. M Gunasekaran, AD (QC), DAC, New Delhi.
19. Shri. S. K. Tomar, S. O. (NSC), DAC, New Delhi.
20. Shri P. C. Verma, S. O. (NSC), DAC, New Delhi.
21. Shri. Lekhraj Sharma, Consultant (NSC), DAC, New Delhi.
22. Shri M. R. Gautam, Assistant Grade-II (NSC), DAC, New Delhi.