:
No.17~J212008-SDJV
Government ofIndia
Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture & Cooperation)
F1212,Shastri Bhawan,
:i'·~WDelhi.
io"
. Dated: December, 20.08.
Sub: Minutes of the 16th meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards,
Notification and Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops held under the
Chairmanship of DDG (Hort.), ICAR at 10.30 A.M. on October, 2008,'
7th
2008 in the Committee Room No.20S, 2nd Floor, Krishi Anusandhar Bhawan-
II, lAID Complex, New Delhi-ll0012.
The undersigned has been directed to forward i~heenclosed copy of the minutes of
the 16th meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notificationand Release
of Varieties for Horticultural Crops held under the Chairmanship of DDG (Horticulture),
ICAR at 10.30 AM. on ih October, 2008·in the Committee Room No.205, 2nd Floor,
Krishi Anusandhar Bhawan-II, IAR! Complex, New Delhi-l 10012. The comments, if
any, on the minutes may please be forwarded to the undersigned within a month from the
date of receipt of the minutes.
The sponsoring authorities whose proposals have been considered and could not
be recommended for release/notification for want of more information may kindly see the
remarks indicated against each variety for initiating necessary action accordingly. The
morphological characters of the varieties recommended for release/notification are also
enclosed.
<;lIS .
?/-
\0-\).: .
(c.SHANMUGAM)
DY. COMMISSIONER (QC)
Distribution:
I. All members of the Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and
Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops including special invitees ..
2. Director of Horticulture of all States/U'Ts. '
3. All Directors of State Seed Certification Agencies'
4. All Managing Directors of State Seeds Corporation including NSC and SFCI.
5. Co-convenors of all the State Seed Sub-Committees for Horticultural Crops
6. All Project Directors/Coordinators. ; .
7. Director (Seeds)/DC(Seeds)/AC(Seeds) .
Copy to: Technical Director, NIC, DAC to upload theJminutes ion the official Website
for public use. . ~;
\;
'I
I
Minutes of the 16th Meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards,
Notification and Release of varieties for Horticultural Crops held under the
Chairmanship of Dr. H. P. Singh, Deputy Director General(Horticulture), ICAR,on
October, 2008 in Conference Hall of Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan-II, Pusa
7th
Complex,NewDelhi-110012.
The list ofthe participantswho attendedthe meeting is annexed asAnnexure - I.
The Chairman, Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and
Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops welcomed the members of the Committee.
He requested the members of the Committeeto examine the proposals in depth so as to
best variety to be chosen for release/notification. He explained the advantages of VCU
Test and assessment ofthe varieties intothe coordinated trials of the crop concerned. He .
requested the authority concerned, who sponsored the proposal that the data pertains to
the cultivars should be presented in a betterway so as to expose the betterfeature ofthe
cultivars for recommendation of release and notification. After brief introduction,
Chairman ofthe Committee directed the Member- Secretary to take upthe agenda items
ofthe Meetingfor discussion.
. ItemNo.1: Confirmation of minutes.of the 15thmeeting of Central Sub-Committee
on Crop Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties· for
Horticultural Crops held on 16th April, 2008 at Krishi Anusandhan
Bhawan-l,PusaComplex,NewDelhi-110012.
The minutes of 15th meeting of the Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards,
Notificationand Release ofVarieties for HorticulturalCrops were confirmed.
ItemNo.2: Review of follow-up action on the decisions taken in the earlier
meetings of Central Sub-Committeeon Crop Standards, Notification
and Releaseof Varietiesfor Horticultural Crops.
The Sub-committee noted about the Gazette Notification S.O.No. 1714 (E) dated
the 18th July, 2008 issued for the cultivars recommended by the 15th Sub-committee for
release/notification.
The Sub-committee also approved following varieties recommended by the 15th
Sub-committee, subject to certain conditions for which the sponsoring authority has
provided the required information. Therefore, the Sub-committee recommended for
notification.
2
I
Table -1
S.No. Crop Variety Remarks
1 Potato Kufri Himsona Recommended for notification for entire
country..
Item No.3: Proposals for release and notification (Central Release)
The Sub-Committee has recommended the following varieties for release/
notification as per detail given below:-
Table-2
~~~--------~------------~--------------------------------------
S.No Crop Variety Remarks
1. Potato Kufri Khyati Recommended for release and cultivation for
(J.93-86) main (autumn) season variety in Rajasthan,
Haryana, Punjab, U.P., Bihar West Bengal,
Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and
Chhattisgarh. Maturity 75-85days. Moderately
.resistantto late blight and resistantto early blight
Recommendedfor notificationfor entire country.
2. Cauliflower Kashi Agahani Recommendedfor release and cultivation in Uttar
ivrmc-12 Pradesh, Punjab and Delhi. It is tolerant to high
temperature and rainfall during its vegetative
growth. Moderately resistant to downy mildew.
Recommendedfor notificationfor entirecountry.
3. Okra Gujarat Okra Recommended for release and cultivation in
Hybrid-2 Kharif Season in the state of West Bengal,
Assam, Uttarakhand, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh,
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Haryana, Delhi, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Kerala and
Tamil Nadu.
Recommendedfor notificationfor entirecountry.
4. Onion Bhima Raj Recommended for release and cultivation in
(B-780-5-2-2) Kharif in the State of Haryana, Delhi, Rajastha
and Gujarat.
Recommendedfor notificationfor entire country.
------_._------------------------
. 3
},
-
Trll
5. Chilli LAM- 353 Recommended for release and cultivation
(LCA-353) Eastern Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Punjab,
Tarai Regionof Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.
Recommendedfor notificationfor entire country.
6 Brinjal Arka Anand Recommended for release and cultivation in the
(BWBH-3) state of Punjab, Uttarakhand, Haryana, Gujarat,
Rajasthan, Delhi, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh and
Karnataka.
Recommendedfor notificationfor entire country.
The Sub-committee deferred thefollowing proposals for want of certain
information,which is stated against each:
Table-3
I
1. Cashew BH-6 The proposal in question performs only in the
Nut State of. Orissa, therefore, Sub-committee
directed the sponsoring authority to forward this
proposal through the Orissa State Seed Sub-
committee for consideration.
2. Cashew BH-85 The proposal in question performs only in the
Nut State of Orissa, therefore, Sub-committee
directed the sponsoring authority to forward this'
proposal through the Orissa State Seed Sub-
committeefor consideration.
I
3. Brinjal Azad B-4 The proposal in question has been deferred for
(IC 557007) want of appropriate data with morphological
(KS-235) Character. The Sub-committee directed to the
sponsoring authority to' re-submit the proposal
1
with required data.
4. Cauliflower Pusa Paushija The proposal in question has been deferred for
(DC-76) want of adequate data. The Sub-committee
directed to the sponsoring authority to re-submit
the proposalwith required data.
5. Cowpea KashiSudha The Sub-committee deferred the proposal for
(VRCP-5) want of adequate data. Further, the Sub-
committee directed to the sponsoring authority to
generate more data as the data provided by the
sponsoring authority has not shown any
superiority over the check and not found stability
ofthe variety.
4
Item No.4: Notification proposals (State Varieties)
Following sponsored proposals (State Varieties) were recommended by the Sub-
Committee for notification:-
TABLE-4
51. Crop Variety Sponsoring State
No. and Year of Release
1. Garlic JG-99-213(Gujarat Garlic) Gujarat, 2007
2. Brinjal JBGR-99-5 Gujarat, 2006
3. Coconut Mahuva Gujarat, 2006
4. French Bean VL Bean-2 Uttarakhand, 2008
Following proposals have not been recommended for notification for the reasons
stated against each:-
TABLE-5
.
51.
Crop Variety Remarks
No.
1. Tomato VL Tamatar-4 Sponsoring authority may re-submit the
(Uttarakhand,2008) proposal alongwith the All India
Coordinated Trial Data on Disease.
2. Capsicum VL Shimla Mirch2 Sponsoring authority may re-submit the
(Uttarakhand, 2008) proposal alongwith the All India
Coordinated Trial Data on Disease.
3. Garden Vivek Matar-11 Sponsoring authority may re-submit the
Pea (Uttarakhand, 2008) proposal alongwith the All India
Coordinated Trial Data on Disease.
4. Carrot Pusa Asita(IPC-126) Sponsoring Authority directed to re-
(Delhi, 2008) submit the proposal alongwith the copy of
the release proposal and proceedings in
which it has been considered by the State
Seed Sub-committee of Delhi
5. Carrot Pusa Rudhira(IPC-122) Sponsoring Authority directed to re-
(Delhi, 2008) submit the proposal alongwith the copy of
the release proposal and proceedings, in
which it has been considered by the State
Seed Sub-committee of Delhi
5
ItemNo.5: Review of Handbook of seed and planting material testing manualand
labels for horticultural crops.
Division of Horticulture, Indian Council of Agricultural Research(ICAR) has
provided a book called 'Handbook of Seed and Planting Material Testing Manual and
Labels for Horticultural Crops' for the use of seed testing laboratories. The efforts was
highly appreciated and it was decided that manual should be upgraded by incorporating
the following information. The proposalof labelwas approved.
1. Seeds/planting material sampling.
2. Receipt and registration of seeds/planting material samples.
3. Physical purity analysisfor seeds/planting material.
4. Germination testing procedurefor seeds/planting material.
5. Determination of genuineness of cultivars of seeds/planting material.
6. Moisture determination (whereever applicable).
7. Determination of the seeds/planting material health.
8. Testing of seeds/planting materialvigour.
9. Storage of seeds/planting material.
10. Any other test required such as polycarylamide Gel Electrophoresis,etc.
11. Suggested list of equipments for testing seeds/planting material.
.12. Forms used in seeds/planting testing laboratories:-
a. Seeds and planting materialAnalysis Card.
b. Seeds and planting materialAnalysis Report.
·C. Seeds and plantingmaterial Analysis Reportfor Revalidation Lot.
13. Recommended list of Booksand Journalsfor seeds/planting materialtesting.
14. Test for Heterogenecity.
The Chairman, Central Sub-committee on Crops Standards, Notification and
Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops-cum- Deputy Director General(Horticulture),
ICAR directed the concerned Project Coordinators to amend the Manual in question
within three months and submit to the Sub-committee so as to meet the requirement of
the Central Seed Certification Board.
Next meeting shall be held in 1stweek ofthe March, 2009.
The meeting ended with a vote ofthanks to the Chair.
Annexure-l
List of participants who attended the 16th meeting of the Central Sub-Committee on Crop
Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops held under the
Chairmanship Deputy Director General (Horticultural Crops), ICAR at 10.30 A.M. on
7th
October, 2008 in Committee Room No.205, 2nd Floor, Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan-II, JARI
Campus, New Delhi-ll0012.
1. Dr. H.P~ Singh, Deputy Director General (Horticultural Crops), ICAR, Krishi
Anusandhan Bhawan-II, IARI Campus, New Delhi-l10012. - Chairman.
2. Shri C. Shanmugam, Deputy Commissioner (QC), Ministry of Agriculture, Department
of Agriculture & Cooperation, F1212, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.
3. Shri R.K. Rathore, NHM, DAC, Ministry of Agriculture, Govt.ofIndia.
4. Shri S.K.Bhatia, Addl. Commissioner (Hort.), DAC Ministry of Agriculture, Govt. of
India.
5. Shri R.K. Kakani, Sr. Scientist (P.B.), NRC on Seed Spices, Ajmer.
6. Shri R.V. Nair, Head, Division of Germplasm, CPCRI, Kasargode.
7. Dr. K. Madhavi Reddy, Sr. Scientist, IIHR, Bangalore.
8. Dr. T.A. More, Director, CIAH, Bikaner.
9. Dr. N. Prakash, Joint Director,ICAR,Res. Complex for Manipur Centre, Imphal.
10.Dr. D.P. Singh, Director Research, GBPAU&T, Pant Nagar.
11.Dr. S.K. Pandey, Director, CPRI, Shimla.
12. Dr. Mathura Rai, Director, IIVR, Varanasi.
13. Shri Yash pal Mahawat, Director, Rajasthan State Seed & Organic Production
Certification Agency, Jaipur.
14.Dr. Umesh Srivastava, ADG (Hort.), ICAR, KAB-II, Pusa, new Delhi-ll0012.
15. Dr. B. Singh, Principal Scientist, IIVR, Varanasi.
16. Shri K. Anand Krishna, GM (M&C), KSSC, Bangalore.
17. Shri M. Gunasekaran, DAC, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi.
18. Shri Lekh Raj Sharma, AAO (NSC), Seed Division-IV (QC), DAC, New Delhi.
19. Shri M.R. Gautam, Asstt. (NSC), Seed Division-IV (QC), DAC, New Delhi.
Annexure-II
Salient features of the varieties recommended for release and notification by
Central Sub-Committee on Crof! Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties
for Horticultural Crops in its 16t Meeting held on 7th October, 2008 held under the
Chairmanship of Dr. H.P.Singh, Deputy Director General (Horticulture), ICAR in
Conference Hall of Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan-II, Pusa Complex, New Delhi -
110012.
S. No. Particulars Salient features
1.
i) Crop Potato (Solamum tuberosum L.)
ii) Variety Kufri Khyati (J.93-86)
iii) Institution or Agency responsible Central Potato Research Institute, Shimla -
for developing the variety 171 00l.
iv) Parentage with details of its MS/82-638 x KUFRl PUKHRAJ
pedigree
v) Agency responsible for Central Potato Research Institute, Shimla -
maintaining breeder seed. 171 001.
vi) State the varieties, which most Kufri Sutlej
I closely resemble with the
proposed variety m general
characteristics.
..
vii) Specific area of adaptation and Recommended for release and cultivation for
recommended ecology. main (autumn) season variety m Rajasthan,
Haryana, Punjab, ur., Bihar, West Bengal,
Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and
Chhattisgarh. Maturity 75-85 days. Moderately
resistant to late blight and resistant to early
blight.
viii) Description of the variety/hybrid.
a) Plant height 80-85 em
b) Distinguishing
morphological characters:
1. Haulms , Tall, erect, medium-compact, vigorous
11. Stem Many, thick, not coloured at base, well
developed straight wings.
iii. Leaf Leaves open, rachis green
iv. Lealets Oval, rough surface with entire margin
v. Folioles Large and many
vi. Foliage colour Dark green
vii. Tubers Oval, Pale yellow, medium sized, fleet eyes,
light yellow flesh.
1
viii.Dormancy Medium ( 10weeks)
ix. Stolons Medium
x. Flowers White, medium in size, moderate flowering in
hills, sometime scanty flowering also observed
in plains.
xi. Sprouts Cylindrical, slightly red purple and hairy.
I c) Maturity (range in number of 75-85 days
days)
d) Maturity Group Early under short day conditions. It can be
grown as early (0 to 75 days harvest) variety.
e) Agronomical features e.g. Recommended as main season crop variety
resistant to lodging, shattering, under normal fertilization. Seed rate - 3.0-3.5
fertilizer responsiveness, tonnes/ha.
suitability for early or late sown
condition, seed rate, etc.)
~~--------------~--------------------------~
f) Quality of produce of Good keeping quality (Storage behaviour at
grainlforage/fiber/green ambient temperature)
fruits/tubers including nutritive
value where relevant.
Specific gravity (at 75 days 1.06
1.
harvest)
ii. Dry matter (at 75 days harvest) 15%
iii,Cooking quality Good, cooks well in 30 minutes, tastes good
iv. Texture Waxy
v. Stem-end discolouration Absent
g) Reaction to stresses wherever --
relevant.
Description of parents Female (MS/82-638) Male (Kufri Pukbraj)
a) Plant height 70-75 em 75-80 em
b) Distinguishing morphological Tall haulms, many thin Tall haulms, many
characters Stems with poorly thick stems with well
developed straight wings developed straight
and no colour at the base wings and colour at
of stem; leaves open with the base of stem,
green rachis, oval leaflets leaves open with
with entire margin and green rachis,lanceolate
rough surface, small and leaflets with entire
many folioles, grey-green margin and smooth
foliage colour, creamy surface, large and many
oval-oblong tubers with folioles, grey-green
fleet eyes and yellow foliage colour, white
flesh colour, medium oval tubers with fleet
size stolons. Eyes and yellow flesh
.colour, short stolons.
2
c) Days to 50% flowering 75-80 days under long 75-80 days under long
days conditions. conditions.
d) Maturity range in number of 80-90 days under long 80-90 days under short
days (seed to seed) days conditions conditions.
e) Is there any problem of No No
synchronization? If yes,
methods to overcome it.
t) Reaction to major diseases Moderate resistance to Resistant to late blight
(under field and controlled late blight and resistant and early blight
conditions, reaction to to early blight. disease.
physiological strains/biotypes
to be indicated wherever
possible).
g) Reaction to major pests (under There is no major pest There is no major pest
field and controlled conditions problem for potato crop problem for potato crop
including store pests) during main season. during main season.
h) Agronomic features (resistance Seed rate 3.0-3.5 Seed rate 3.0-3.5 tonnes/
to lodging and shattering, Tones/ha, normal ha, normal fertilizer
fertilizer responsiveness, seed Fertilizer dose. Dose. This variety is a
rate etc.) Nutrient efficient variety.
i) Reaction to stresses Perform well under low
fertility conditions.
ix) Reaction to major diseases under Moderately resistance to late blight and resistant
field and controlled conditions to early blight.
(reaction to physiological
strains/races/bio-types to be
indicated wherever possible.
x) Reaction to major pests (under --
field and controlled conditions
including stored pests)
xi) Average yield under normal 25-28 tonnes per hectare under early (75 days)
condition (yield in kg/qtl. / ton per harvest.
ha.)
S. No. Particulars Salient features
2.
i) Crop Cauliflower (Brassica oleracea varbotrytis)
ii) Variety Kashi Agahani (IVRMC-12)
iii) Institution or Agency responsible Indian Institute of Vegetable Research,
for developing the variety P.B.No.5002, P.O.B.H.V., Varanasi (U.P.)-
221005.
iv) Parentage with details of its Gene pool maintained at IIVR colleted from
pedigree Hazipur Bihar.
v) Agency responsible for Indian Institute of Vegetable Research,
maintaining breeder seed. P.B.No.5002,P.O.B.H.U.,Varanasi (U.P.)-22100S.
3
vi) State the varieties, which most Pusa Early Synthetic
closely resemble with the proposed
variety in general characteristics.
vii) Specific area of adaptation and Recommended for release and cultivation in
recommended ecology. Uttar Pradesh, Punjab and Delhi. It is tolerant to
high temperature and rainfall during its
vegetative growth. Moderately resistant to
downy mildew.
viii) Description of the variety/hybrid.
a) Plant height 70-80 cm
b) Distinguishing morphological
characters:
1. Leaf colour Green
11. Leaf lobing Absent
111. Leaflength 42-45 em
IV. Leafwidth 20-23 em
v, Leafwt. 550-650 g
VI. Leaf apex shape Ovate
VB. Number of leaf/plant 18-22
viii. Leaf pubescence Absent
IX. Curd length 16-17cm
x. Curd width 15 -16 cm
Xl. Curd shape Semi-Dome shape
X11. Curd texture Fine
Xlll. Curd weight 850-900 g
xiv. Branching Not covered
xv. Days to 50% harvesting 75-80 days
xvi. Maturity (Days seed to seed) 210-220 days
xvii. Reaction to environmental Tolerant to high temperature and humid
stress. condition during vegetative growth.
XVlll. Characteristics different Intermediate stalk, petiole and leaf lamina and
from those of he parents. vigorous growing habit.
c) Maturity (range in number of • Seedlings are ready after 22-25 days of
days) sowing for transplanting.
• Takes about 70-68 days for curd
formation.
d) Maturity Group The variety belongs to Mid maturity group of
cauliflower.
e) Agronomical features e.g. Optimum temperature for curd initiation and
resistant to lodging, shattering, development is 25-27°C. Suitable for mid sown
fertilizer responsiveness, suitability conditions (Second week of August to Last
for early or late sown condition, week of the September) and ready for harvest
seed rate, etc.) from mid November to late December under
north Indian plains. Seed rate 30 g/ha. Respond
4
--::
well to fertilizer, irrigation and other
intercultural operations.
f) Quality attributes purpose for Retentive white, medium sized and compact
,.,
.•.. ..
which recommended curd.
i.
Table/processing/export/any For table purpose.
other
Table quality attributes/ White compact curd, free from bracts and
11.
Nutritional quality. nceyness.
g) Reaction to environmental It can withstand high temperature and high
stresses. rainfall during its vegetative growth.
Description of parents
ix) Reaction to major diseases under Moderately resistant to downy mildew.
field and controlled conditions
(reaction to physiological
strains/races/bio-types to be
indicated wherever possible.
--
x) Reaction to major pests (under
field and controlled conditions
including stored pests)
xi) Average yield under normal 215 qtl./ha
condition (yield in kg/qtl. / ton per
ha.)
S.No. Particulars Salient features
,
3.
i) Crop Okra (Abelmoschus esculentus (L.) Moench.)
ii) Variety Gujarat Okra Hybrid-Z
iii) Institution or Agency responsible Vegetable Research Station, Junagadh
for developing the variety Agricultural University, Junagadh - 362 001.
iv) Parentage with details of its The Okra hybrid lNDOH-02-2 has been
pedigree developed at Junagadh from cross combination
of KS-404 x HRB-l 08-2.
v) Agency responsible for Vegetable Research Station, Junagadh
maintaining breeder seed. Agricultural University, Junagadh - 362 001.
vi) State the varieties, which most None
closely resemble with the proposed
variety in general characteristics.
vii) Specific area of adaptation and Recommended for release and cultivation in
recommended ecology. Kharif season in the state of West Bengal,
Assam, Uttarakhand, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh,
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Haryana, Delhi, Madhya
5
---------- ----------------------- -------_.
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Kamataka, Kerala and
TamilNadu.
viii) Description ofthe variety/hybrid.
a) Plantheight 158
b) Distinguishing
morphological characters:
1. Stemcolour a) At Seedlingstagethe colouris green.
b) Atmaturity stage,colourisreddish.
2. Leafshape Leavesaredeeplylobbedand serrated.
3. Pods Smooth,greentender andattractiveincolour.
4. Daysto 50%flowering 43
5. Number offruitsperplant 24
6. Fruit length (ern) 11
7. Fruit girth 5-6
8. Intemodallength (em) 6-7
9. Tenfruitsweight (g) 137
10. Stemcolour
a. Seedlingstage Green
b. Maturitystage Reddish
11. Leafshape Deeplylobbed
c) Maturity (range m number of
days)
d)MaturityGroup
e) Agronomical features e.g.
resistant to lodging, shattering,
fertilizer responsiveness, suitability
for early or late sown condition,
seedrate, etc.)
1. Sowingseason Kharif
2. Spacing 60cmx 30em
3. Fertilizers 100-50-50NPK kg/ha
4. Seedrate 8-10kg/ha
f) Quality attributes purpose for --
whichrecommended
iii. Table/processing/exportlany
other
iv. Table quality attributes/
Nutritional quality.
g) Reaction to environmental --
stresses.
r--~~-~~-~--------r----~~~-~~-~-~~~~~------
Descriptionofparents Female HRB 108-2 Male KS-404
a) Daysto 50%flowering 43 42
b) Plantheight (ern) 141 152
c) Numberof fruitsperplant 18 22
6
d) Fruit length (em) 11-12 11
e) Fruit girth 6 5-6
f) Intemodallength (em) 6-7 6-7
g) Ten fruits weight (g) 142 135
h) Stem colour
a. Seedling stage Green Green
b. Maturity stage Reddish Reddish
i) Leaf shape Deeply lobbed serrated Deeply lobbed serrated
j) Fruit size Medium Thick
ix) Reaction to major diseases under Less incidence of YVMV.
field and controlled conditions
(reaction to physiological
strains/races/bio-types to be
indicated wherever possible.
x) Reaction. to major pests (under Less infection of Jassids and pod borer.
field and controlled conditions
including stored pests)
xi) Average yield under normal 138 qtls./ha
condition (yield in kg/qtl. / ton per
ha.)
--
S.No. Particulars Salient features
.
•
4.
i) Crop Onion (Allium cepa L.)
ii) Variety Bhima Raj (B-780-5-2-2)
iii) Institution or Agency responsible National Research Centre for Onion and Garlic,
for developing the variety Rajgurunagar, Pune - 410505.
--
iv) Parentage with details of its
pedigree
v) Agency responsible for National Research Centre for Onion and Garlic,
maintaining breeder seed. Rajgurunagar,Pune- 410505.
vi) State the varieties, which most. Dark red colour and duration resembles with
closely resemble with the Baswant 780, A.Kalyan and N-53.
proposed variety In general
characteristics.
vii) Specific area of adaptation and Recommended for release and cultivation in
recommended ecology. Kharif season in the State of Haryana, Delhi,
Rajasthan and Guiarat,
viii) Description of the variety/hybrid.
a) Plant height 45-50 em
b) Distinguishing morphological
characters: Dark red coloured bulbs, stripes on bulb, oval
7
,-------;----------- ----------------
shape, very less number of bolters and doubles
in Rabi, thin neck, number of leaves ranged from
8-12, TSS 10-10.5%.
-
Number of leaves 8-12/plant
-
Polar Diameter (P) 42-45 em
-
Equatorial Diameter (E) 45-50 em
- P.E. 0.85-0.95
- Neck thickness 0.6-0.8cm
-
% Total soluble solids 10-10.5
-
Days to harvest after 100-105 days in Kharif
transplanting 115-120 day in Rabi
-
Characters different from those Bulbs oval in shape and single centred.
of the parents.
c) Maturity (range in number of
days)
-
Seedling to flowering 115-120 day after transplanting in Rabi and
-
Transplanting to fruiting. 100-105 days in Kharif.
d) Maturity Group Early in Kharif and medium in Rabi.
e) Agronomical features e.g. Erect Plant habit, less pseudostem length,
resistant to lodging, shattering, minimum neck thickness of the bulb, uniform
fertilizer responsiveness, neck fall during Rabi, early in maturity.
suitability for early or late sown
condition, seed rate, etc.)
f) Quality attributes purpose for
which recommended .
Table/processing/export Attractive red colour, suitable for immediate
consumption.
Table quality attributes/ - Single centered, suitable for salad, pungent.
Nutritional quality.
--
g) Reaction to environmental
stresses.
Description of parents NA
IX) Reaction to major diseases under Field tolerance to foliar diseases.
field and controlled conditions
(reaction to physiological
strains/races/bio-types to be
indicated wherever possible.
x) Reaction to major pests (under Field tolerance to thrips.
field and controlled conditions
including stored pests)
xi) Average yield under normal- 250-300 qtls/ha
condition (yield in kglqtl. / ton per
ha.)
8
S. No. Particulars Salient features
-
5.
i) Crop Chillies (Capsicum annuum L.)
c--'---.
ii) Variety LAM-353 (LCA-353)
iii) Institution or Agency responsible A.P. Horticultural University, Horticultural
for developing the variety Research Station, Lam, Guntur -522 034.
iv) Parentage with details of its LCA 305 x Selection 116
pedigree
v) Agency responsible for A.P. Horticultural University, Horticultural Research
maintaining breeder seed. Station,Lam,Guntur-522 034.
vi) State the varieties, which most --
closely resemble with the
proposed variety In general
characteristics.
vii) Specific area of adaptation and Recommended for release and cultivation in
recommended ecology. Eastern Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Andhra
Pradesh, Kamataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala,
Punjab, Tarai Region of Uttar Pradesh and
Bihar.
viii) Description of the variety/hybrid.
a) Plant height 80-85cm
b) Distinguishing morphological
characters:
- Plant growth habit ., Medium & spreading
- Stem pubescence Glabrous
- Stem colour Green
- Leaf pubescence Glabrous
- No. of Pedicles/axils One
- Pedicle position at anthesis Pendent
-
Corolla colour White
- Fruit position Declining
-
Fruit colour in immature stage Light green
- Fruit colour in mature stage. Red
• Characteristics different Fruits are slender and light green in colour when
from those of the immature
c) Maturity (range in number of 50% flowering was observed after 65-70 days
days) after transplanting.
--
d) Maturity Group Early (160-170 days)
e) Agronomical features e.g. Crop response well to fertilizer application up to
resistant to lodging, shattering, 300 kgN, 60 kg P 0s and 120 kg K O/ha
2 2
fertilizer responsiveness,
suitability for early or late sown
condition, seed rate, etc.)
Seed rate - Direct sowing 6 Kg/ha I
9
Transplanted 1.5-1.6kg/ha
Spacing- Rainfed 60x 15em
Irrigated 75x 30em
f) Quality attributes purpose for
which recommended
Table/processing/export Suitablefor greenchilli/drychilli/processing&
export
Table quality attributes/ Oleoresins- 9-10%
Nutritional quality. Capsanthin38000-40000 (EOAcolourvalue)
Capsaicin- 0.35-0.38%
g) Reaction to environmental Moderatelytolerantto drought.
stresses.
~----+-----~--~-------------+----------------------------------~
Descriptionofparents LeA - 305 Selection116
a) Plantheight 65-75em 90-95em
b) Distinguishing morphological Plantsarebushywith Erectand semi-
characteristics lengthybrancheswith spreading
yellowanthers.
c) Daysto 50%flowering 85-90days 60-70days
d) Maturity ripening (range in 185-190days 160-170days
number of daysseedto seed)
e) Is there any problem of No No
synchronization? If yes,
methodto overcome it.
f) Reaction to major disease Fairlytolerantto viruses Tolerantto dieback
under field and controlled and leafspot diseases andfruitrot.
conditions (reaction to
Physiological strains/races/bio-
types to be indicted wherever
possible).
g) Reaction to major pests (under Moderatelytolerantto Susceptibleto sucking
field and controlled conditions suckingpests,thrips, pests.
includingstorepests) mites andaphids.
h) Agronomic features (e.g. Croprespondswell to Croprespondswellto
fertilizers responsiveness, seed recommendeddoses recommendeddosesof
rate etc. fertilizers. fertilizers.
ix) Reaction to major diseases under --
field and controlled conditions
(reaction to physiological
strains/races/bio-types to be
indicatedwhereverpossible.
x) Reaction to major pests (under Susceptibleto suckingpests and pod boresunder
field and controlled conditions fieldconditions.
includingstoredpests)
-~--.-------+--------------------
xi) Average yield under normal 75qtls./ha (Drychillies)
condition (yield in kg/qtl. / ton per
ha.)
10 .
S.No. Particulars Salient features
,----
6.
i) Crop Brinjal (Solanum melongena L.)
ii) Variety Ar~a Anand (BWBH-3)
iii) Institution or Agency responsible Indian Institute of Horticultural Research,
for developing th~ variety Hessarghatta Lake Post, Bangalore - 560089.
iv) Parentage with details of its BWBH-3 is a FJ Hybrid developed by Crossing
~digree IIHR-3 x IIHR-322
v) Agency responsible for Indian Institute of Horticultural Research,
maintaining breeder seed. HessarghattaLakePost, Bangalore- 560 089.
vi) State the varieties, which most None
closely resemble with the
proposed variety general
III
characteristics.
-
vii) Specific area of adaptation and Recommended for release and cultivation in the
recommended ecology. State of Punjab, Uttarakhand, Haryana, Gujarat,
Rajasthan, Delhi, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh and
Karnataka.
viii) Description of the variety/hybrid.
a) Plant height 120-140cm
b) Distinguishing morphological
characters:
- Plant habit Tall & Spreading
- Foliage colour Green stem and green foliage (leaves)
- Fruit characteristics Fruits green, Long average weight 50-55 g.
-
No of Branches 12-16
-
Days to 50% flowering 45-50 days
- Days to first harvesting 60-65 days
-
Fruit length 22-24 em
- Fruit diameter 2.43 em
- Number of fruits per plant 30-34
- Average fruit weight (g) 50-55 g
d) Maturity (range in number of 50% flowering - 45-50 days after transplanting.
~s) Maturity - 60-65 days after transplanting
_. d) Maturity Grol!L Early
e) Agronomical features e.g. resistant Growingseason- Kharif andRabi
to lodging, shattering, fertilizer Response to fertility - high (180-150-120 NPK
responsiveness, suitability forearlyor kgs/ha)
latesowncondition, seed rate,etc.)
f) Quality of produce of Fruitsaregreen long,has goodcookingquality.
grain/forage/including nutritive value
whereverrelevant.
--
11
~----,--------------------------~
g) Reaction to environmental Resistant to Bacterial Wilt.
stresses.
----·----r--------------------------~-------------------
Description of parents Female Parent Male Parent
(HHR-3) (IIHR-322)
a) Plant height 90-100 em. 70-80 em
b) Distinguishing morphological
characteristics
- Plant habit Medium Tall Erect
- Foliage colour Green Light green
- Fruit shape Long Short
- Stem end scar Medium Absent
- Colour of ripening red Yellow Yellow
c) Maturity (range in number of 60-65 days 55-60 days
days seed to seed)
d) Maturity (from transplanting to 70-75 days 65-70 days
first harvest)
Maturity Group (early, medium 140-150 days 100-120 days
late whenever such (Medium) (Early)
classification exists).
e) Reaction to major disease Resistant to BW Restistant to BW
under field and controlled I
conditions (reaction to
Physiological strains/races/bio- I
types to be indicted wherever
possible). .
f) Reaction to major pests (under
field and controlled conditions
including store pests)
g) Agronomic features like Growing season - Kharif and Rabi
resistance responsiveness, Response to fertility-high
suitability for early of late
sown conditions, seed rate
etc.for maintenance.
h) Reaction to stress Resistant to Bacterial Resistant to Bacterial
Wilt Wilt.
IX) Reaction to major diseases under BWBH-3 has resistance to Bacterial Wilt.
field and controlled conditions Resistant to Rolstonia solancecearum race-I and
(reaction to physiological biovar-3
L
strains/races/bio-types to be
___ t-indicated wherever pos_si_b_~le.,_.._..-+- . --I
i x) Reaction to major pests (under field Less incidenceof shoot& fruitborerwasobserved.
and controlled conditions including
'-- ~~d pests) ----_____,-l---------------,----------j
xi) Average yield under normal 60,000-65,000kgs/ha.
condition (yield in kg/qtl. / ton per
ha.)
12
Annexure-III
Saliefttfeatures of the varieties recommended for notification (State Release) by
Central Sub-Committee on Cro~ Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties
for Horticultural Crops in its 16t Meeting held on 7th October, 2008held under the
Chairmanship of Dr. H.P.Singh, Deputy Director General (Horticulture), ICAR, in
Conference Hall of Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan-H, Pusa Complex, New Delhi -
110012.
S. Particulars Salient features I
No.
-
1.
i) Crop Garlic (Allium stativum 1,.)
ii) Variety .TG-99-213(Gujarat Garlic-4)
iii) State &year of release. GuiaratJ2007
iv) Parentage with details of its pedigree Local collection from village Choki of
Junagadh district and maintained in
germplasm as line No.213 in the year
1999.
v) BreederlInstitute responsible for Vegetable Research Station, Junagadh
maintaining breeder stock. Agricultural University, Junagadh - 362
001(Gujarat).
vi) State the variety, which most closely None
resembles with the proposed variety in
general characteristics.
vii) Recommended ecology. Saurashtra and Middle Gujarat
viii) Description of the variety/hybrid ' The bulbs of this variety are medium in
size, compact and white in colour.
Description of the parents of the hybrid NA
1.
Two identifiable and distinguishable The bulbs of this variety are medium
morphological characters. in size, compact and white in colour.
2. The leaf width IS narrow with
medium green in colour.
--
Maturity (range in number of days from
seeding/transplanting/ flowering/
fruiting etc.
Maturity group Medium
ix) Reaction to major diseases under field --
and controlled condition (Reaction to
physiological strains/races/biotypes to
be indicated wherever possible.
--
x) Reaction to major pest under field and --
controlled condition including store
I
pests.
I
xi) Yield in kgs/qtls./tons per hectare. 8,933 kg./ha
1
--
S. Particulars Salient features
No.
.--
2.
i) Crop Brinjal (Solanum melongena L.)
ii) Variety .JBGR-99-5(JBGR-l)
iii) State &year of r~l~ase. Gujarat/2006
iv) Parentage with details of its pedigree Local collection from village Ajab of
Junagadh district and maintained m
gerrnplasm as line No.16.
v) Breeder/Institute responsible for Vegetable Research Station, Junagadh
maintaining breeder stock. Agricultural University, Junagadh - 362
001(Gujarat).
f----
vi) State the variety, which most closely None
resembles with the proposed variety in
general characteristics.
vii) Recommended ecology. Saurashtra and Middle Gujarat
viii) Description of the variety/hybrid This variety has yielded advantage of
18.13% as compared to check varieties
green. The fruits of this variety are
medium in size, compact and white in
colour.
Description of the parents of the hybrid NA
1.
Two identifiable and distinguishable The fruits are medium to big in size
morphological characters. with round shape, attractive green
.
colour and good shining .
2. Calyx and pedicel are green and
medium in size.
3. Moderate grooves are present on
fruits.
~ Maturity (range in number of days from --
seeding/transplanting/ flowering/
fruiting etc.
Maturity R;fOUp Medium
.. --
ix) Reaction to major diseases under field
and controlled condition (Reaction to
physiological strains/races/biotypes to
be indicated wherever possible.
--
x) Reaction to major pest under field and
controlled condition including store
pests.
xi) Yield in_kgs/qtls.ltons per hectare. 40107 kg./ha
2
S. Particulars Salient features
No.
3.
i) Crop Coconut (cocos nucifera L.)
ii) Variety Mahuva
-
iii) State &year of release. Gujaratl2006
iv) Parentage with details of its pedigree West Coast Tall x Dwarf Green
v) Breeder/lnstitute responsible for Agricultural Research Station (Hort.),
maintaining breeder stock. Junagadh Agricultural University,
Junagadh - 362 0Ol(Gujarat).
vi) State the variety, which most closely None
resembles with the proposed variety in
general characteristics.
vii) Recommended ecology. Coastal area of the Gujarat State.
viii) Description of the variety/hybrid The variety is alternative/replacement for
existing hybrid D x T (Mahuva). It is also
alternative solution of seed production
problem 0hybrid T x D (Mahuva).
Description of the parents of the hybrid Female parent (West Coast Tall) should
be sown three year earlier than the male
parent (Dwarf Green) to synchronize the
flowering for successful seed production.
Two identifiable and distinguishable Hybrid T X D (Mahuva): it is semi tall
morphological characters. with good bukling habit and nuts are large
and round in shape.
Female: West Coast Tall: It is tall, not
possess the buckling habit and nuts are
large and oblong in shape.
Male: Dwarf Green: It is dwarf, buckling
habit and nuts are medium in size.
Maturity (range in number of days from --
seeding/transplanting/ flowering/
fruiting etc.
Maturity group Medium
ix) Reaction to major diseases under field --
and controlled condition (Reaction to
physiological strains/raceslbiotypes to
be indicated wherever possible.
.
x) Reaction to major pest under field and Dwarf green is highly tolerant against
controlled condition including store black headed caterpillar, while W.C.T. is
pests. susceptible against black headed
caterpillar.
xi) Yield in kgs/qtlsJtons per hectare. 43 nuts/palm/year
3
s. I
Particulars Salient features
No.
4.
i) Crop French bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.)
ii) Variety VL Bean 2
-
iii) State &year of release. Uttrakhand/2008
-------<---
iv) Parentage with details of its pedigree
v) Breeder/Institute responsible for VPKAS (leAR), Almora - 263 601.
maintaining breeder stock.
vi) State the variety, which most closely VL Bauni Bean 1in plant type and pods.
resembles with the proposed variety in
general characteri~tics.
vii) Recommended ecology. Uttarakhand hills (Mid) under irrigated
and rainfed conditions.
viii) Description of the variety/hybrid
- Early plant vigour Good
- Plant growth habit Bush
- Plant height (em) 40-45
- Stem pigmentation green
- Days to 50% flowering 30-35
- Maturity days (1st picking! 45-50
harvest)
- Pod colour Light green
- Pod peak shape . Short beak
- Pod shape Round
- Pod quality Stringless
- Pod texture Smooth
- Pod cultivature Slightly curved
-
Av. Pod length (ern) 14
- No. of pod in lhkg 84
- No of seed per pod 5-6
- 100 seed wt. 29 g
- Seed colour Dark brown with slight mottling.
Description of the parents of the hybrid NA
I 1.
Two identifiable and distinguishable Plants bush type, 40-45cm long
morphological characters. with light green foliage.
2. Pods light green, smooth, round
and stringless and thin.
3. Flower pink in colour
Maturity (range in number of days from First picking in 45-50 days after sowing in
seeding/transplanting/ flowering! mid hills.
fruiting etc.
Maturity group Medium
i ,1::.,~~,
4
ix) Reaction to major diseases under field Resistant to root rot, moderate resistance
and controlled condition (Reaction to to anthracnose, angular leaf spot &rust.
physiological strains/races/biotypes to
be indicated wherever possible.
--
x) Reaction to major pest under field and
controlled condition including store
pests.
xi) Yield in kgs/qtls./tons per hectare.
a. Commercial product 126-131 qtls./ha
b. Seed 14-15 qtls./ha
5