Minutes of the 19th Meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards Notification
and Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops held under the Chairmanship of Dr.
H.P. Singh, Deputy Director General (Hort.) on 24th July, 2012 at Krishi Anusandhan
Bhawan II, New Delhi.
The list of participants is at Annexure-I.
The Chairman, Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and Release
of Varieties for Horticultural Crops welcomed the members of the Committee and special
invitees for the meeting. He commended that the Secretariat of the Sub-Committee had
timely issued the Minutes of the 18th Meeting of the Central Sub-Committee and also
uploaded the same on the website of DAC. The Deputy Commissioner (QC) and Member
Secretary of the Central Sub-Committee mentioned that the specific action had been taken on
deferred proposals of previous meetings in consultation with the concerned breeder/PC/PD
and after removing various deficiencies the same have been included in the Agenda Note for
this meeting. Thereafter, Member Secretary of the Sub-Committee took up the Agenda items
for consideration by the Sub-Committee.
Item No.1: Confirmation of minutes of the 18th Meeting of Central Sub-Committee on
Crop Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties for Horticultural
Crops held on 20th January, 2012 in the Committee Room of IIVR,
Varanasi (UP).
The Minutes of 18th meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards,
Notification and Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops were confirmed. The Sub-
Committee noted that the Gazette Notification S.O. 456(E) dated 16th March, 2012 was
issued for cultivars recommended in the 18th Meeting of Sub-Committee for
release/notification.
Item No.2: Review of follow up action of the 18th Meeting of Central Sub-Committee on
Crop Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties for Horticultural
Crops held on 20th January, 2012.
The Sub-Committee approved the notification of the varieties mentioned below in
Table No. 1 which were considered in the 18th Meetings of the Sub-Committee but kept in
abeyance for want of information like detailed Morphological Characters, genesis of the
parentages, name of the States suitable for cultivation, analytical trial data etc. The required
information has now been received.
Table-1
S. Kind Variety
No.
1. Garlic Yamuna Safed-5 (G-189)
2. Onion NHRDF RED 2 (L 355)
3. Cow pea Kashi Nidhi (VRCP-6)
4. Cabbage Pusa Cabbage-1 (KGMR-1)
(Hybrid)
1
The proposal of Bottle gourd (hybrid) c.v. Santosh (Santosh 20) (KBGH 20) was
rejected despite reminders, sponsoring authority has not provided the information with
regards to the seed production methodology, Source of parents and their genesis which is a
mandatory requirement for release/notification of variety.
Item No.3: Proposals for release and notification for consideration of the 19th meeting
of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and Release of
Varieties for Horticultural Crops.
The following proposals have been received for discussion and consideration in the
19th Meeting of the Sub-Committee for release/notification (central varieties) and the decision
of the committee are given as under:
Table-2
The Sub-Committee has recommended the following varieties for release and
notification as per details given below:
S. Kind Name of the Remarks
No. variety
1 Okra Kashi Kranti Recommended for cultivation in the States of UP,
(Hybrid) (VRO-22) Bihar, Jharkhand and Punjab and suitable for warm
humid condition.
2 Potato Kufri Garima Recommended for cultivation in the state of Uttar
(MS/99-1871) Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal in Autumn season.
3 Potato Kufri Gaurav (JX Recommended for cultivation in the States of Punjab,
576) Haryana, Uttaranchal and Western Uttar Pradesh in
plain areas under autumn season
4 Pea Kashi Samridhi Recommended for cultivation in the States of Uttar
(VRPMR-11) Pradesh, Bihar and Punjab
5 Indian Kashi Harithima Recommended for cultivation in the States of Uttar
Bean (IIVRSEM-8) Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Karnataka,
Meghalaya and Andaman Nicobar Island.
6 French Arka Anoop Recommended for area extension to the States of
Bean Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Uttaranchal, Chhattisgarh,
Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Kerala.
7 Ash Kashi Surbhi Recommended for cultivation in the States of Punjab,
gourd (IVAG-03) Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Jharkhand suitable for warm
season (25-300 C) subject to submission of NBPGR
Certificate and detailed morphological characters.
8 Brinjal VNR – 218 Recommended for cultivation in the States of Assam,
(Hybrid) West Bengal, Punjab, Jharkhand, Orissa, Portblair
and North Eastern Hill region suitable for warm
season (18 – 280 C).
2
9 Chilli VNR – 332 Recommended for cultivation in the States of Punjab,
(Hybrid) (Rani) Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala,
Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry suitable for warm
season (18 – 280 C).
10 Chilli Pant Chilli-4 Recommended for cultivation in the States of suitable
(PC-56) for spring-summer and rainy season subject to
submission of the states covered under the Zones I,
IV, V, VII and VIII.
11 Chilli Gujarat Anand Recommended for cultivation in the States of in
Vegetable Chilli - Kharif – Rabi season under irrigated condition subject
112 to submission of the proposal with the signature of
(ACS 06-2) Head of the Institute and submission of the States
covered under the Zone III.
12 Tomato Kashi Abhimaan Recommended for cultivation in the States of Jammu
(Hybrid) (VRTH-101) & Kashmir, HP, Uttaranchal, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar and Jharkhand in autumn-winter season.
Table-3
Release and notification of the following varieties have been deferred for the reasons noted
against each variety.
Sl. Kind Name of the Reasons for deferment
No. variety
1 Chilli NCH-587 For want of information regarding Zone-wise data
(hybrid) analysis along with performance of hybrids
compared with recent hybrid check.
2 Bitter gourd Savitri (NBGH- For want of fresh trial data along with
(hybrid) 167) performance of the hybrid to be compared with
the latest check variety.
3 Coconut Kalpatharu (IND i) Specify non-wilt affected area.
125 S) ii) Performance of proposed hybrid is inferior
than check variety in terms of Copra content,
Copra yield, oil content and oil yield.
4 Brinjal Swarna Mohit For want of CD and CV value along with
(Hybrid) (HABH – 8) analytical result of data and detailed
morphological characters.
5 Brinjal Pant Brinjal–5 i) Reason for giving old data i.e. 2004-07
(PB-66) ii) Submission of following information.
a. Numerical disease data.
b. Detailed morphological character and
c. NBPGR Certificate for seed sample
submission.
3
6 Brinjal Pant Brinjal-6 i) Reason for giving old data i.e. 2004-07
(PB-67) ii) Submission of following information.
a. Numerical disease data.
b. Detailed morphological character and
c. NBPGR Certificate for seed sample
submission.
Table-4
Release of the following varieties have been rejected for the reasons noted against each
variety.
Sl. Kind Name of the Reasons for Rejection
No. variety
1 Chilli Pant Chilli-3 (PC Proposal does not contain parentage details,
– 7) morphological characters, no statistical analysis,
and no CD and CV value; therefore the committee
rejected the proposal.
2 Tomato Pant Tomato-10 Proposal may be re-submitted along with the fresh
(Hybrid) trial data and other necessary enclosure.
3 Tomato Anand Tomato – Proposal may be re-submitted along with the fresh
4 (ATL – 01-19) trial data and other necessary enclosure.
4 Tomato Bidhan Tomato Proposal may be re-submitted along with the fresh
(Hybrid) Hybrid – 4 trial data and other necessary enclosure.
(BCTH – 4)
5 Okra Narendra Okra – Cultivar was identified during April, 2005 and
1 (NDO– 10) very old trial data without statistical analysis,
therefore the committee rejected the proposal.
Item No.4: Proposals for Notification (State Varieties) for consideration in the 19th
meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and
Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops.
The following proposals have been received for discussion and consideration in the
19th Meeting of the Sub-Committee for notification (state varieties) and the decision of the
committee are given as under:
Table-5
The Sub-Committee recommended following State Varieties for Notification
Sl. Kind Name of the Sponsoring Authority Sponsoring State
No. variety and Year of Release
1 Brinjal Shalimar Brinjal SKUAST-K, Jammu and
(hybrid) Hybrid-1 Shalimar. Kashmir/2009
2 Brinjal Shalimar Brinjal SKUAST-K, Jammu and
(hybrid) Hybrid-2 Shalimar. Kashmir/2009
3 Brinjal HLB-25 Haryana Agricultural Haryana/2004
University, Hisar.
4
4 Sweet Shalimar SKUAST-K, Jammu and
pepper Capsicum Shalimar. Kashmir/2009
(hybrid) Hybrid-2
5 Sweet Shalimar SKUAST-K, Jammu and
pepper Capsicum Shalimar. Kashmir/2009
(hybrid) Hybrid-1
6 Chilli Gujarat Anand Anand Agricultural Gujarat/2011
(hybrid) Vegetable Chilli University, Anand.
Hybrid-1
(GAVCH-1)
7 Tomato Shalimar Tomato SKUAST-K, Jammu and
(Hybrid) Hybrid-1 Shalimar. Kashmir/2009
8 Tomato Shalimar Tomato SKUAST-K, Jammu and
(Hybrid) Hybrid-2 Shalimar. Kashmir/2009
9 Okra Gujarat Anand Anand Agricultural Gujarat/2011
Okra-5 (GAO-5) University, Anand.
10 Cucumber Shalimar SKUAST-K, Jammu and
(hybrid) Cucumber Shalimar. Kashmir/2009
Hybrid-1
11 Cucumber Shalimar SKUAST-K, Jammu and
(hybrid) Cucumber Shalimar. Kashmir/2009
Hybrid-2
12 Potato Shalimar Potato-1 SKUAST-K, Jammu and
Shalimar. Kashmir/2009
13 Potato Shalimar Potato-2 SKUAST-K, Jammu and
Shalimar. Kashmir/2009
14 Garlic HG-17 Haryana Agricultural Haryana/2010
University, Hisar.
15 Apple Shalimar Apple-1 SKUAST-K, Jammu and
Shalimar. Kashmir/2009
16 Apple Shalimar Apple-2 SKUAST-K, Jammu and
Shalimar. Kashmir/2009
17 Senna Gujarat Anand Anand Agricultural Recommended
Senna-1 (GAS-1) University, Anand. subject to following
conditions:
(i) Secretariat of
Sub-Committee
verify that seeds of
Senna are covered
under the Seeds
Act, 1966.
(ii) Seed Division of
DAC finalize Seed
Certification
Standards of Senna.
5
Table-6
The Sub-Committee has deferred the following varieties (State Varieties) for
notification for the reasons stated against each variety:
S. Crop Variety Sponsoring Reasons for deferment
No. Authority
1 Chilli Gujarat Chilli 3 S.D. Agricultural For want of quantified
University, morphological
Sardarkrushinagar. characters and All India
Coordinated Trial Data
on Pest/diseases
2 Okra Gujarat Junagadh For want of quantified
(hybrid) Junagadh Okra Agricultural morphological
Hybrid-3 University, Junagadh. characters and All India
(GJOH-3) Coordinated Trial Data
on Pest/diseases
3 Fennel Gujarat Fennel- S.D. Agricultural For want of quantified
12 University, morphological
Sardarkrushinagar. characters and All India
Coordinated Trial Data
on Pest/diseases
4 Fenugreek GM-2 (Gujarat S.D. Agricultural For want of quantified
Methi-2) University, morphological
Sardarkrushinagar. characters and All India
Coordinated Trial Data
on Pest/diseases.
Item No. 5: Review of Handbook of seed and planting material testing manual and
labels for horticultural crops.
Manual for labeling and quality testing of seeds/planting materials of Horticultural
crops was finalized and adopted for submission to Central Seed Committee.
The meeting ended with a vote of thanks to the Chair and Members of the Committee.
6
Annexure I
List of participants who attended the 19th Meeting of the Central Sub-Committee on
Crop Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties for Horticulture Crops held
under the Chairmanship of Dr. H. P. Singh, Deputy Director General (Horticulture),
ICAR at 10.30 AM on 24th July, 2012 in the Conference Hall No. 511, Krishi
Anusandhan Bhawan-II, Pusa, New Delhi-110012.
1. Dr. H. P. Singh, DDG (Horticulture), ICAR, New Delhi-Chairman.
2. Shri. R. K. Trivedi, DC (QC), DAC, New Delhi.
3. Dr. James George, Project Coordinator (Tuber Crops), CTCRI, Trivandram.
4. Dr. B. Singh, Project Coordinator (Vegetable Crops), IIVR, Varanasi
5. Shri. Sanjay Tiwari, MD, MP State Seed Certification Agency, Bhopal.
6. Shri. Ekadashi Nandi, CSCO, Odisha State Seed and Organic Produce certification
Agency, Bhubneshwar.
7. Dr. S. K. Dhankhor, Scientist, Department of Vegetable Science, CCSHAU, Hisar.
8. Dr. B. S. Dudi, Prof. & Head, Department of vegetable Sciences, CCSHAU, Hisar.
9. Dr. S. K. Malhotra, Principal Scientist (Horticulture), ICAR, KAB-II, New Delhi.
10. Dr. R. K. Singh, Assistant Director (Horticulture), NHRDF, Nashik.
11. Shri Satyabrata Maiti, Director, DMAPR, Anand, Gujarat.
12. Shri. Bir Pal Singh, Director, CPRI, Shimla.
13. Dr. Umesh Shrivastav, ADG (Horticulture), ICAR, New Delhi.
14. Shri. Jayant Deshmukh, Director, Maharashtra State Seed Certification Agency,
Akola.
15. Shri. Ramesh Kumar, Director, DPR, New Delhi.
16. Dr. A. S. Siddhu, Director, IIHR, Bangalore.
17. Dr. P. S. Nayak, Director, IIVR, Varanasi.
18. Shri. Rajneesh Rajput, Horticulture Division, ICAR.
19. Dr. D. C. Bhandari, NBPGR, New Delhi.
20. Shri. Galtan Singh, Dy. Director, UPSSCA, Meerut.
21. Shri. R. K. Yadav, Joint Director, NHRDF, New Delhi.
22. Shri. M Gunasekaran, AD (QC), DAC, New Delhi.
23. Shri. S. K. Tomar, S. O. (NSC), DAC, New Delhi.
24. Shri. Lekhraj Sharma, Consultant (NSC), DAC, New Delhi.
25. Shri M. R. Gautam, Assistant Grade-II (NSC), DAC, New Delhi.
7