Minutes of the 59th Meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards,
Notification and Release of Varieties for Agricultural Crops held under the
Chairmanship of Dr. J.S. Sandhu, Assistant Director General (Seeds), ICAR, on 27th
January, 2011 at Vaikunth Mehta National Institute of Cooperative Management,
University Road, Pune – 411 007.
The Chairman, Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and Release of
Varieties for Agricultural Crops welcomed members of the Sub-Committee, and special invitees.
The list of the participants who attended the meeting is annexed as Annexure-I.
Member-Secretary of the Sub-Committee provided the account of the earlier Sub-
Committee and its follow-up action and the issues to be discussed by this Sub-Committee. After
introduction regular agenda items were taken-up for discussion as under:-
Item No.1: Confirmation of the minutes of 58th meeting of Central Sub-Committee
on Crop Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties for
Agricultural Crops held on 23rd December, 2010 at NBPGR, New Delhi.
The minutes of 58th meeting of Central Sub Sub-Committee on Crop Standards,
Notification and Release of Varieties for Agricultural Crops has been circulated vide letter No. 3-
8/2010-SD.IV dated 31st January, 2011, therefore, the minutes of the meeting were confirmed.
The Sub-Committee noted that the Official Gazette Notification in this regard is being issued.
Item No.2: Review of follow up action of the 58th meeting of Central Sub Sub-
Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties for
Agricultural Crops.
Proposals received for release and notification for various crop/ varieties for the
58th meeting have been considered and those were found as per requirements were
recommended for cultivation and the notification to this effort is being issued.
Item No.3: Release and notification Proposals received for consideration in the
59th Meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification
and Release of Varieties for Agricultural Crops.
The following proposals have been received for consideration in the 59th meeting of
the Sub-Committee for release/notification (Central varieties) and the particulars of the same are
given as under:-
1
Table – 1
Following varieties recommended for release/notification.
S. Crop Name of the variety Recommended area
No.
1. Wheat DPW 621-50 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the
(PBW 621 & DBW 50) States of Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, Rajasthan (except
Kota and Udaipur divisions), Western UP (except Jhansi
division), parts of J&K (Jammu & Kathua districts), parts
of HP (Una district & Paonta valley) and Uttaranchal
(Trari region) in timely sown under irrigated conditions.
Average yield under normal condition is 51.73 q/ha.
2. Recommended for notification to entire country.
2. Wheat WH 1080 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the
States of Haryana, Punjab, U.P., U.K., Rajasthan and
plains of J&K under rainfed area. Average yield under
normal condition is 30.80 q/ha.
2. Recommended for notification to entire country.
3. Green IPM 02-14 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the
Gram States of Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Orissa
in summer season.
2. Recommended for notification to entire country.
4. Castor DCS - 107 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the states
of all castor growing areas in the country under both
rainfed and irrigated condition in Kharif season. Average
yield 1762 kg/ha.
2. Recommended for notification to entire country.
5. Barley UPB 1008 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the
States of Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jammu &
Kashmir under rainfed timely shown condition. Average
yield under normal condition is 26.4 q/ha.
2. Recommended for notification to entire country.
Table No. 2
Following varieties have been rejected for release/ notification for which the reason is
stated against each.
2
S. No. Crop Variety Remarks
1. Durum PDW 315 The cultivar under reference has not been
Wheat showing superiority in yield over the check
and susceptible to disease.
2. Lentil Vardan (IPL - 315) The cultivar under reference has been
susceptible to disease. The data generated
for this cultivar under irrigated condition
whereas it is recommended for dry land
situation
Item No. 4: Proposals received for consideration of notification (State varieties).
The following proposals considered for notification (State Varieties)
Table No. 3
S. No. Crop Variety Sponsoring State
1. Rice NDR 2065 (IET 17476) Uttar Pradesh 2010
Table No. 4
Following varieties have been deferred for notification for which the reason is stated
against each.
S. No. Crop Variety Remarks
1. Rice Narendra Sugandha Deferred for want of data on quality trait.
Dhan (NDR 6093)
(IET 19768)
2. Rice Narendra Usar Dhan Deferred for want of data on quality trait.
2009 (NDRK 50002)
(IET 19667)
Item No.:5 Amendments in the Gazette Notification No. S.O.2187 (E) dated
27.8.2009
The Central Sub-committee on Crop Standards, Notification & Release of Varieties
for Agricultural Crops recommended to amend the Gazette Notification No. S.O.2187 (E) dated
27.08.2009 with regards to Pearl Millet as “Pearl Millet Avika Bajra Chari (AVKB-19)” in place of
“Avika Bajra Chari (AVKS-19)” which is happened due to typographical mistakes in the said
Gazette notification.
3
Item No: 6 Development of the Variety in accordance with the PFA Act.
The issue for developing the variety in accordance with the standards prescribed
under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act (PFA) has been discussed. Member of the Sub
Committee as well as scientists who attended the meeting reviewed the PFA standards provided
by the Member Secretary.
After considering the efforts to be involved to develop the variety in accordance with
the PFA, it was decided to have a meeting under the chairmanship of DDG (CS) ICAR with the
project coordinator of the concern crop coordinators to take decision in this regard.
Meeting ended with a vote of thanks to the Chair.
4