No.3-8/2010-SD.IV
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture &Cooperation)
F/212, Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi.
Dated: 11.01.2011
ss=
Sub: Minutes of the meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop
Standards, Notification and Releaseof Varieties for Agricultural Crops
held under the Chairmanship of Prof. S.K. Datta, Deputy Director
General (Crop Sciences), ICAR at 11.30 A.M 23rd December, 2010 at
NBPGR,PusaComplex/New Delhi-110 012.
The undersigned has been directed to enclose a copy of the minutes of the
58th meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and
Release of Varieties for Agricultural Crops held under the Chairmanship of Prof.
S.K. Datta, Deputy Director General (Crop Sciences), ICAR at 11.30 A.M on 23rd
December, 2010 at NBPGR,PusaComplex, New Delhi-l10 012
The sponsoring authorities of the proposals of their crop/variety, which
could not be recommended for release/notification for want of more information
may kindly see the remarks indicated against each variety for initiating necessary
action accordingly.
This is for favour of information and further action please. ~V?D\'
.~
?--. "-
(C.SHANMUGAM)
DY.COMMISSIONER(QC)
Distribution:
1. All members of the Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and
Release of Varieties for Agricultural Crops including special invitees.
2. Director of Agriculture of all States/ UTs.
3. All Directors of State Seed Certification Agencies.
4. All Managing Directors of State Seeds Corporation including NSCand SFCI.
5. Co-conveners of all the State Seed Sub-Committees
6. All Project Directors/Coordinators.
7. Director (Seeds)/DC(Seeds)/ACCSeeds)
~y to: Technical Director, NIC, DAC to upload the information on the official
Website for public use.
Minutes of the
5Sh
Meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards,
Notification and Release of Varieties for Agricultural Crops held under the
Chairmanship of Prof. S.K. Dutta, Deputy Director General (Crop Sciences), ICAR, on
2:fdDecember, 2010 at NBPGR,New Delhi.
The Chairman, Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and Release of
Varieties for Agricultural Crops welcomed members of the Sub-Committee, and special invitees.
The list of the participants who attended the meeting is annexed as Annexure-I.
Member-Secretary of the Sub-Committee provided the account of the earlier Sub-
Committee and its follow-up action and the issues to be discussed by this Sub-Committee. After
introduction regular agenda items were taken-up for discussion as under:-
sz"
Item No.1: Confirmation of the minutes of meeting of Central Sub-Committee
ana--~ere~ise-
-----------------------on-Crop----Standards,- Notification of---Vi:irieties -for--
th
Agricultural Crops held on 10 October, 2010 at Central Research
Institute of Jute and Allied Fiber (leAR), Barrackpore, Kolkata -
700120 (WB).
The minutes of
sih
meeting of Central Sub Sub-Committee on Crop Standards,
Notification and Release of Varieties for Agricultural Crops has been circulated vide letter No. 3-
st
7j2010-SD.IV dated 1 December, 2010, therefore, the minutes of the meeting were confirmed.
The Sub-Committee noted that the Official Gazette Notification in this regard is being issued.
ss=
Item No.2: Review of follow up action of the meeting of Central Sub Sub-
Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and Releaseof Varieties for
Agricultural Crops.
The Sub-Committee also approved the notification of the following varieties
th th h
recommended QY the 44th,54 55 and 5i meeting, which have been kept in abeyance
for want of submission of sample with NBPGR, detailed morphological characters, genesis of
parentage etc. for which required information has been received:-
Table;. 1
S.No Kind Variety
1.
Maize YM-9905 (PKVM-SHATAK)
2. PearlMillet RHB-173(MH-1446)
3. Pearl Millet PusaComposite-612(MP-480)
1
4. SlackGram CO-6(COSG653)
5. Rice (Hybrid) 27P11 (lET 19766)
6. Maize (Hybrid) Sisco855 (Sisco Shim)
7. Maize (Hybrid) Sisco555 (Sisco Ujala) .
8. Maize (Hybrid) Sisco 111 (Sisco 840)
9. Rice Motigold (NP 1024) .
10. Rice SONAL(NP3114) (lET 18299)
Item No.3: Release and notification Proposals received for consideration in the
ss"
Meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards,
Notification and Release of Varieties for Agricultural Crops.
The following proposals have been received for consideration in the 58th meeting of
the Sub-Committee for release/notification (Central varieties) and the particulars of the same are
given as under:-
Table - 2
Following varieties recommended for release/notification.
S. Crop Nameof the Recommendedarea
No. variety
1 Wheat Pusasuketl HS507 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Himachal Pradesh, Uttarkhand, Jammu and Kashmir and the
I
North Eastem State under timely sown rain fed condition in
\ lower and Mid Hills. Resistant to all three rust. Average yield
under normal condition is26.60 q/ha,
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
2 Wheat PusaPrachi\ 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
(HI 1563) Eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal (except
Hills) Orissa,Assamand the placeof North Eastern Statesin late
sown condition. Average yield under normal condition is 37.60
\
q/ha.
\
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
\
3 Wheat WHD943 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
\
Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, Rajasthan (except Kota and Udaipur
divisions), West Uttar Pradesh (except Jhansi division) Jammu
\
and Kathua districts of Jammu and Kashmir, Paonta Valley and
I
Unadistrict of HimachalPradesh,andtarai region of Uttarkhand.
2
Resistant to all three rust, Flag smut, leaf blight and powdery
mildew diseases. Average yield under normal condition is 48.00
q/ha.
2. Recommendedfor notification to entirecountry,
4 Wheat Netravati 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
(NIAW 1415) Maharashtra and Karnataka under rain fed condition and
restricted irrigated condition. Average yield under normal
condition is20.00 q/ha..
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
5 Barley DWRB73 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the states of
Punjab, Haryana, Western Uttar Pradesh, Delhi and Rajasthan
(except Kota and Udaipur region) under irrigated late sown
condition. Resistant to leaf rust. Average yield under normal
condition is38.70 q/ha,
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
6 Maize DHM119 (BH4062) 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka in
Kharif season. Tolerant to TLB, MLB, BLSB, BSDM, PFSR.
Average yield under normal condition is85.53 q/ha.
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
7 Maize PMH4 (JH 31153) 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Punjab, .Haryana, Delhi and Western Uttar Pradesh under
irrigated condition. Average yield under normal condition is83.00
q/ha.
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
8 Maize PMH5 (JH3110) 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Chhattisgarh in Kharif
season under both irrigated and rain fed condition. Averageyield
under normal condition is58.90 q/ha,
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
9 Pearl RHB-l77 (MH-1486) 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Millet Rajasthan, Haryana and Gujarat under rain fed low fertility
condition. Resistant to downy mildew. Average yield under
normal condition is 19.50q/ha.
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
10 Pearl HHB226 (MH 1479) 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Millet Rajasthan, Gujarat, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab and Madhya
Pradesh. Highly resistant to downy mildew and tolerant to rust.
3
Averageyield under normal condition is20.81q/ha.
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
11 Bengal MNK-1 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Gram Kamataka, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa and Tamil Nadu in normal
sown rain fed as well as irrigated condition. Moderately resistant
to wilt. Average yield under normal condition is 12.80q/ha.
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
12 Urdbean Mash479 (KUG479) 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Punjab, Haryana, Western Uttar Pradesh and Plains of
Uttarkhand in Kharif season. Resistant to MYMV, Powdery
mildew, Bacterial LeafSpotand Leafcrinkle virus and tolerant to
Anthracnose. Average yield under normal condition is 11.77
q/ha.
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
13. Urdbean Mash391 (LU391) 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Kamataka, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa and Tamil Nadu in summer
season. Resistant to MYMV,Leaf crinkles virus, Cercospora Leaf
Spot, Anthracnose and Powdery mildew. Average yield under
normal condition is7.68q/ha,
2. Recommendedfor nOtificationto entire country.
14. Green PKVAKM- 4 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Gram Karnataka, Tamil NaduandOrissain Kharif season.Averageyield
(AKM-9904)
under normal condition is 10toll q/ha.
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
15.FieldPea Dantiwada Fieldpea 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
1 (SKNP04-09) Eastern Uttar Pradesh,Bihar, Jharkhandand West Bengalin Rabi
season.Averageyield under normal condition is 17.11q/ha,
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
16. Indian PusaMustard 26 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Mustard (NPJ-113) Plainsof Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, Delhi,
and Western Uttar Pradesh in multiple cropping systems.
Average yield under normal condition is 16.00q/ha.
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
17. Indian PusaMustard 27 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
. Mustard (EJ-1?) Uttar Pradesh,Ma~hyaPradesh,iJttarakhand and KotaRegionof
Rajasthan in multiple cropping systems. Average yield under
4
normal condition is 15.35q/ha.
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
18. Sesame RajasthanTil 351 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Kama-taka,
(RT 351)
Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana and Jammu & Kashmir.
Resistant to macrophomina stem & root rot, leaf curl, phyUody
and moderately resistant to cercospora leaf spot. Average yield
under normal condition is6.29 qzha.
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
19. Desi FDK124 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Cotton Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan under irrigated conditions.
Averageyield under normal condition is20 to 21.00 q/ha,
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
20. Grain Rajasthan Mandor 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Amara Amamath 7 (RMA 7) Rajasthan, Gujarat, Orissa, Maharashtra,Haryana and Delhi in
nth
plain areas for Rabi Season. Average yield under normal
condition is 14.32q/ha.
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
21. Oat JO03-91 (SC) 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Bundelkhand Region of Uttar
Pradesh, Raguri and Urulikanchan areas of Maharashtra and.
Anand adjoining area of Gujarat.
2. Recommendedfor notification to entire country.
22. Linseed JLS-73(SLS-73) 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Bundelkhand Region of Uttar
Pradesh,north east and Central Maharashtra and north east part
of Gujarat in Rabiseason under irrigated condition. Resistantto
Sc/erotiam root rot, powdery mildew and moderately resistance
to leaf' blight. Average yield under normal condition is 53.89
qfha.(Green fodder yield)
2. Recommendedfor nOtificationto entire country.
. Table - 3
Following varieties have been recommended for release/notification, subject to certain
conditions as stated against each:-
5
S. Crop Nameof the Remarks
No. variety
1 Rice lndam 200-017 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
(lET 20419) Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh under irrigated and
transplanted condition.
2. Recommended for notification to entire country, subject to
submission of information about the seed production
methodology, registration particulars with Ministry of Scienceand
Technology to conduct the researchand development.
2. Rice CSR 30 (88-H5-1-1- The Sub-Committee recommended for renaming cultivar CSR30
2) (lET 14720) (88-HS-1-1-2) as Basmati CSR 30 subject to submission of
certificate from DRR,Hyderabadfor National BasmatiTrial (NBT).
3. Maize KMH-25K60 1. Recommendedfor releaseand cultivation in the StatesAndhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra in Kharif
season.
2. Recommended for notification to entire country, subject to
submission of information about the seed production
methodology; mode of the development, parentage details.
4. Maize Kaveri 50 (KMH 50) 1. Recommendedfor releaseand cultivation in the StatesPunjab,
Haryana, Delhiand Western Uttar Pradeshin Rabiseason.
2. Recommended for notification to entire country, subject to
submission of information about the seed production
methodology, mode of the development, parentage details.
5. Pearl KaveriSuper Boss 1. Recommended for release and cultivation in the States of
Millet (MH 1553) Rajasthan, GUjarat, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil
Nadu in Kharif season under both rain fed and irrigated
condition.
2. Recommended for notification to entire country, subject to
submission of information about the seed production
methodology, mode of the development, parentage details.
Item No.4: Proposals received for consideration of notification (State varieties) in
ss"
Meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification
and Release of Varieties for Agricultural crops.
The following proposals for notification (State Varieties) are received for
ss'"
consideration in the meeting of the Sub-Committee:
6
Table No.4
Following varieties have been recommended for notification
S. No. Crop Variety Sponsoring State
1.
Rlce LunaSampad(lET 19470) Orissa/ 2010
2. Rice REETA(lET 19969) Orissaj 2010
3. Rice MANDAKlNl Orissa/ 2010
(OR2077-4) (lET 17847)
4. Rice NuaChinikamini (lET 18394) (CR258)) Orissa/201O
5. Rice Phalquni(lET 18720)(CRAC2224-1041) Orissa/ 2010
6. Rice LunaSuvama (lET 18697) Orissa/ 2010
7. Rice MRUNAUNl (OR1898-18) (lET 18649) Orissa/ 2009
8. Rice TEJASWINI(OR 1912-22) (IET20005) Orissa/ 2009
9. GreenGram PKVGREENGOLD Maharashtra /2007
10. RedGram Rajeevlochan Chattisqarh/2006
11. Taramira VallabhTaramira-1 (PUT93-11) Uttar Pradesh/2009
12. Taramira VallabhTaramira-2 (PUT93-1) Uttar Pradesh/2009
Table No.5
Following varieties have been recommended for notification, subject to certain conditions
as stated against each:-
S. Crop Variety Sponsoring Remarks
No. State
l.
Cotton G.Cot.20 (GSHV97/59) Gujarat/2008 Submission of NBPGRcertificate for
seedsample for accession
2. Sugarcane Sabita (CoOr 03151) Orissa/2009 Submission of All India Coordinated
Trial Dataon diseases.
3. Sugarcane Neelamadhab (CoOR Orissa/2009 Submissionof All India Coordinated
03152) Trial Data on diseases.
4. Groundnut JAL-42 Orissa/2009 Submission of All India Coordinated
Trial Data on diseases.
Table No.6.
Following varieties have been deferred/rejected for the reasons stated against each
S. No. Crop Variety Sponsoring State Remarks
1.
. RedGram AKT-8811 Maharashtra /1995 Deferred for want of Latest
Trial Data
2. RedGram PKVTARA Maharashtra/2010 Rejected due to the cultivar
(TAT-9629) under reference is susceptible
to Wilt disease.
7
Item No.5 Notification of Paddyvariety Sahbhagidhan.
The Paddy variety Sahbhagi Dhan (lET No.19576) IR 74371-70-1-1-CRR-l) was
deferred in the 54th Sub-Committee meeting, for want of clarification on the authorship and
parentage details and the Sponsoring Authority was advisedto re-submit the revised proposal
along with the required information for consideration.
Accordingly, The Sponsoring Authority re-submitted the proposal with required
details regarding authorship and parentage. The Sub-Committee reviewed proposal and
recommended Sahbhagi dhan for release and cultivation in the state of Jharkhand and Orissa
under drought affected rainfed upland and direct seeded condition. The cultivar resistant to
Leaf blast and moderately resistant to Brown spot and Sheath rot. Average yield.under normal
condition is38 to 45 q/ha,
Item No: ·6 Development of the Variety in accordancewith the PFAAct.
The issue for developing the variety in accordance with the standards prescribed
under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act (PFA)was discussed.Most of the Sub-Committee
members as well as scientists who attended the meeting were not aware of the standards
prescribed under PFAfor wheat and Rice. Sub-Committee also noted that Shri N.K. Mourya,
Joint Director (Movement), Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Shri Deepak Gupta, Joint Secretary,
Ministry of Health, Department of Health and Family Welfare, Chairperson, Food Safety and
Standards Authority of India, and Director, Central Institute of Post Harvest and Technology,
Ludhiana, had been invited as specialinvitees to assistthe Sub-Committee but would not attend
the meeting. It was accepted that varieties which are unfit for human consumption should not
be released/ notified. It was decided that the PFAstandards would be circulated to the Project
Coordinators& the Directors of Agriculture of the states.
Item No:7 Withheld of notification of Wheat Cultivar Pusa 8asant (HD 2985)
and Pusa Bahar (HD 2987) for want of clarification about the
authorship from Project Director, Directorate of Wheat Research
(ICAR), Karnal and request for Notification of rejected Wheat
variety Pusa Borlaug(HD 2967).
8
Sub-Committee noted that the Wheat Cultivar Pusa Basant (HD 2985) and Pusa
Bahar (HD 2987) has been recommended for release by the 54th Sub-Committee meeting
subject to clarification from the Sponsoring Authority about the authorship/name of the
person(s) who helped in the development of variety through Project Director, Dte. of Wheat
Research,ICAR,Karnal. It was decided to notify the above said cultivars. The issue related to
authorship will be decided by the !CAR Head Quarter under the intimation to the Sub-
Committee.
With regards to release of Wheat variety Pusa Borlaug (HD 2967). Sub-Committee
noted that this issuehas been discussedin the 54th Sub-Committee in which it was rejected by
th
the 54 Sub-Committee as the cultivar under reference has no yield advantage over the check
and susceptible to disease. The sponsoring authority made representation to reconsider for
release the above said variety. Accordingly this issue has once again brought to the notice of
h h
the 5i Sub-Committee for reconsic:jeration. 5i Sub-Committee referred this issue to the
expert Committee of ICAR for comments. The expert Committee of rCARwas asked to study
.the yield performance and disease reaction separately by the individual expert to provide the
comments.
The report of the export Committee of ICAR issued vide their letter no.
PS/ADG(Seeds)/2010dated Oih December, 2010 isasfollows:
A) NWPZ: The new variety HD 2967 is not superior in yield than the recommended
check DBW 17 and in disease it is at par with the recommended check in NWPZ.
Hence,it could not be recommended for reconsideration for this zone.
B) In NEPZ,the check variety HD 2733 is superior in yield performance over the new
variety HD 2967. However, HD 2967 is slightly in leaf bright reaction and at par
with other diseases to the check varieties. Hence, it could not be recommended
for reconsideration for this zone. This recommendation has been brought to the
th
notice of the 58 Sub-Committee meeting for information with the remark that no
action in this regard is warranted.
The sponsoring authority requested the Sub-Committee to re-open the issue once aga
~'
in-
<<;»:>
..•
for 3rd time (54th 57th and 58th Sub-Committees) for re-consideration.
,
9
Sub-Committee raised the following issueto reconsiderthe proposals:
1. In casethe variety is releasedwhat are the benefits areto be gained.:
2. In casethe variety is not releasedwhat arethe lossesto bemet.
To answer the above queries, members of the Sub-Committee stated that the Cultivar
under reference is neither superior nor inferior over the check. Similarly, it is neither tolerant
nor susceptibleto rust diseasewhich isthe primary diseaseinwheat. If this variety is released,
'it will helpto replace the wheat variety PBW343 asthe latter is already susceptibleto disease.
Since, the variety is neither superior nor inferior but has the advantage of higher resistance
over diseaseas compared to PBW343, it was decidedto submit this issueto Chairman,Central
SeedsCommittee for decision.
Item No: 8 Revisit the procedures and protocols for notification of seeds bred
by the private sector.
Department of Agriculture and Co-operation, Government of India desired to revisit the
procedures and protocols for notification of seeds bred by the private sector. Instead of
conducting multi-location trials under the aegis of AICRP,the Sub-Committee may accept the
data generated by the private breeders provided the same is obtained as per the procedures
and protocols prescribed in the public research system and is open to our scrutiny, inspection
and oversight. It was also suggested to reduce the prescribed number of years for trials in
respect of seeds breed for focused crops, regions, etc., like hybrid paddy for eastern India,
pulsesfor dry land areasetc. (on the linesof limited trials for imported seedsas per New Policy
on SeedDevelopment).
It was informed to the Sub-Committeethat the new Policyon SeedDevelopment, 1988
stipulate, in caseof oil seeds, cerealsand pulses, initial import of only small quantity is allowed
for in house trials by the importers for multi-locational testing under the all India Coordinator
trials of ICAR. The new variety is tested for one crop season in ICAR's multi-Iocational trials.
The results of the trials' and evaluation are communicated to the Department of Agriculture &
Cooperationwithin 3 months of the endof the crop season. If the performance of the variety is
found to be satisfactory in the multi-Iocational trials, the importer can apply for bulk import of
10
the seeds of the new variety. Bulk import of seeds of a new variety that has performed
. satisfactorily in ICARtrials are allowed only for period of 2 years. Within the period of 2 years
the importer must make arrangements for commercial multiplication of the seed in India
through transfer of parental lines or breeder seed and the seed production technology. Bulk
imports are not permitted beyond a period of 2 years.
Sub-Committee noted the procedure being followed for import of exotic varieties and
its testing under the New Policy of SeedDevelopment/ 1988. Mostof the members felt that the
data generated from testing may not be identical for every year due to Climatic factors;
therefore/ it was decided to generate three years consequent data for testing the variety.
Hence/ if two years data are satisfactory and considering the importance of the seed of some
varieties in certain zones conditional release may be recommended. Conducting the multi-
location trials outside the purview of AICRPfor private varieties requires in depth debate for
which a separatemeeting should be organized between DAC& ICAR.
Besidesto the above, the Sub-Committee took the following decisions:-
1. Breeders/sponsoring authority should prepare themselves to provide the information
with regards to DNA Marker for Finger printing/ primer number, etc. of the variety
proposedfor release/ notification.
2. While submitting the proposal, they should provide glossy photograph of the field,
individual plant/ cob/ rachis, grain, etc. so as to consider physical appearance the
cultivar.
3. It was also decided that the proposal received before 31st December, 2010 status quo
to be maintained with regards to point no. 1and 2.
Meetingended with a vote of thanks to the Chair.
11
ANNEXURE-I
ss"
List of participants who attended the meeting of the Central Sub-Committee on
Crop Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties for Agricultural Crops held
under the Chairmanship of Shri S.K. Datta, Deputy Director General (Crop
Sciences), ICAR at 11:30 A.M. on 23J"dDecember, 2010 in the Committee Room of
NBPGR, Pusa Campus, New Delhi - 110012.
1. Prof. S.K. Datta, Deputy Director General (Crop Sciences), lCAR, Krishi
Bhawan, New Delhi - Chairman
2. Shri C. Shanrnugam, Deputy Commissioner (QC), Ministry of Agriculture,
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, F/212, Shastri Bhawan, New
Delhi.
3. - Sh. O.P. Yadav, Project Coordinator (Pearl Millet)
4. Dr. B.c. Viraktaman, Project Director. (Rice), DRR, Rajendranagar
Hyderbad- 30
5. Dr. J. Kaul, Directorate of Maize Research, Pusa Campus, New Delhi - 12
6. Dr. KS. Hooda, Directorate of Maize Research, Pusa Campus, New Delhi-12
7. Dr. M. Dadlani, Head, Division of Seed Science and Technologies, IAR!,
New Delhi.
8. Dr. KC. Bansal, Director, NBPGR, Pusa Campus, New Delhi - 12.
9. Dr. S.S. Singh, PD, DWR, Karnal- 132001
10. Dr. O.N. Singh, CRR!, Cuttack.
11. Dr. J.J. Chauhan, Director, DRMR, Bharatpur.
12. Dr. N. Nadarajan, Director, IIPR, Kanpur
13. Sh. A. Gopal, Joint Director of Seed Inspection, Directorate of Seed
Certification Department, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu.
14. Sh. KRamamoorthy, Sepcial Officer (Seeds), TNAU, Coimbatore - 641003
15. Sh. Prem Chand, DGM (P), National Seeds Corporation, New Delhi
16. Sh..K.C. Paikora, Managing Director, Chattisgarh State Seed Certification,
Raipur
n.
Dr. Ramesh Chandra, AC (QC), Ministry of Agriculture, Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.
18.. Sh. M. Gunasekaran,AD (QC), Ministry of Agriculture, Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.
19. Sh. Lekh Raj Sharma, AO (NSC), DAC, New Delhi
20. Sh. M.R. Gautam, Asstt Gr.II, (NSC), DAC, New Delhi