,/
v
No.3-51/2016-SD.lV
Government of lndia
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare)
B,1116, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated: 26th Octob er, 2017
Subject:- Minutes the 25th meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop
Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties for Horticultural
Crops to be held under the Chairmanship of Dr. A.K. Singh, Deputy
Director General (Hort.), ICAR, Krishi Anusandhan Bhavan ll, New
Delhi on 18.09.2017.
I am directed to enclose a copy of the minutes the 25th meeting of Central
Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties for
Horticultural Crops to be held under the Chairmanship of Dr. A.K. Singh, Deputy
Director General (Hort.), ICAR, Krishi Anusandhan Bhavan ll, New Delhi on
18.09.2017.
The sponsoring authorities whose proposals could not be recommended for
release/notification due to certain deficiencies may kindly be taken care of for each
of the variety for further necessary action and reconsideration.
This is for favour of information and further necessary action in the matter.
Encl : a/a
Deputy Commissioner (QC)-cum-
Member Secretary, CSC on CSN & RV
Tel: 23387661
DISTRIBUTION
:
1. All members of the Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification
and Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops including special invitees
2.
Director of t-lorticulture of all States/UTs
3. Director of all State Seed Certification Agencies
4. Managing Directors of all State Seed Corporations including NSC
5, Co-conveners of all the State Seed Sub-Committees
6. All Project Directors/Coordinators of Horticulture Crops
.
7 ADC(Seeds)/DC(Seeds)/AC(Seeds)
B. Senior Technical Director, NlC, Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi for uploading the
information on the official website for public use
Copy to : PS to JS(Seeds) for information please.
Draft
,ruinutes of the 25th meeting of Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards' Notification
and Release of varieties for Horticultural Crops held on l8th September,,2017 under the
of Dr. A.K. Singh, Deputy Director General (Horticulture)' ICAR'
chairmanship
Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan 6a-u-lt;, Pusa Complex, New Delhi-110012.
A list of the parlicipants is annexed'
The 2511, Meeting of the central Sub-committee on crop Standards, Notification and
Release of varieties for Horticultural Crops was held on l8tl' September, 2017 under the
ChairmanshipofDr.A.K.Singh,DeputyDirectorGeneral(Horticulture)'ICAR'RoomNo'
104, KAB-ll, Pusa Complex, New Delhi-110012'
At the outset, sh. D.s. Mishra, Member Secretary welcomed.the chairman Dr' A'K'
Singh,DeputyDirectorGeneral(Horticulture),ICARforchairingthemeetingforthefirst
t a im nd e s a p ft e e c r ia u l r r in u v * i i t n e g Js t h fr e o c m ha v rg a e r io o u i s p s p t C ate l s H a o s r t w ';, e I l C l A as R ' I C Il A e R a ls In o s w tit e u lc te o s m p e a d r t a ic ll i p th a e ti n m g e m in b e th rs e
meeting. After brief self introduction by members, the chairman highlighted the importance
o re f l h ia o n r t t ic a u n lt d u r e a l l e c v r a o t p e s t f h o e r e s n o h c a io nc -e in c g o n th o . m p ic ro s d t u a c tu tio s n o 1 f n t d h p e r o fa d r u m ct i i n v g it y c t o o m m m a u k n e i t t i h e e s fa b r y m e in rs c o s m e e lf
generation. He opined that there is a wide scope for post harvest technology for horticultural
crops to boost our export and to enhance income ior the farmers' Ihe Mernber Secretary
informed that there were about zO profotols for consideration for release ar-rd notification in
the meeting. Thereafter, with the permission of the Chairman the regular agenda was taken up
fbr consideration.
No.l: confirmation of the minutes of the 74th Meeting of central Sub-
Item Committee on Crof Standards,. Notification and Release of varicties for
HorticulturalCropsheldon22ndSeptember'2016'
The minutes of the 24tl Meeting of central Sub-committee on crop Standards,
Notifrcation and Release of varieties for"Horticulturar crops held on 2.2"d September,2016
w M (E e in ) r e u d te c a i s t r e ; c u d th l a e 0 t r e 6 e . d 1 fo 2 o r . e 2 n , 0 2 t 1 h " 6 d e w N M a o in s v u e is t m c s . u b e . e u d r y , i 2 o 0 c r 1 . t 6 h c . e o n S c f- o u rr l m f t a iv e r a , d r . n s o T r h c " e o . o m G . a m * z . e n e n t d t t e s e N h d a o v t b i e f y i c b a e th t e io e n n 2 r e 4 S c th . e o i m v ' e N e d e o o t ' i n n 3 g 6 t 6 h o 6 e f
Centralsub-CommitteeonCropStandards,NotificationandReleaseofvarietiesfor
Ilorticultural CroPs
Item No.2: Review of the follow up action of the previous meetings'
Prcposalsreceivedforreleaseandnotitjcationofvariouscrop/varietiesfor
I C {o o r m tic m u i l t t t u e r e a . l T c h r e o p fo s l lo w w e i r n e g d v is a c r u ie s t s ie e s d w a e n r d e d re e c f o e m rr m ed e n in de d th b e y p t r h e e v i C ou o s m m M i e tt e e t e in o g n s f o u f lf i t l h m e e n S t u b o - f
the requisite information by tt e sptnsoring Authority / plant breeder / SAtls and the details
of the same are as under:
Table-1: Varietics recommended by thc Sub-Committee'
Crop Variety Sponsoring AuthoritY Recommended Area
S.
No. Tomato Kashi Aman IIVR. Varanasi Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Bthar
1 and Jharkhand
(vRI-08o1)
2. Cheny Pusa CherrY Vegetable Division, IARI, New Northern Indian
Tomato Tomato-1
Palam Triloki CSK Himachal Pradesh , Krishi Himachal Pradesh
Garden
VishvavidyalaY, PalamPur
Pea
4. Garden Palam Sumool -do- Himachal Pradesh
Pea
Item No.3: Proposals received for consideration of release and notification in 25th
Meeting of central Sub-committee on crop Standards, Notification and
Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops'
The following proposals were considered and approved in the 25tl' meeting of the
Sub-Committee foruIt.ur. and notification (Central varieties) and the particulars of the same
are given as under:
for
Table-2: Details of varieties (central varieties) recommended Release and
Notification by the Sub-Committee are as under:
S. Crop Variety Recommended area Sponsoring AuthoritY
No Onion Bhima Light Red Karnataka and Tamil Nadu ICAR- Directorate of Onion
1 Research, Rai gurunagar, Pune
2. Onion Bhima Safed Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Directorate of Onion &. Garlic
Karnataka, MadhYa Research (ICAR), Pune,
Pradesh,
Maharashtra,
Odisha, Rajasthan and
Tamil Nadu.
J. Garlic Bhima Omkar Delhi, Gujarat, HarYana ICAR- Directorate of Onion and
and Rajasthan Garlic Research, Rajguru Nagar,
Pune.
4. Garlic Bhima PurPle Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Directorate of 0nton &, Uarllc
(r{RCRG-1) Haryana, Bihar and Punjab Research (ICAR), Pune.
(Zone-II!
and
Maharashtra, Karnataka
and Andhra Pradesh (Zone
VI)
Indian Institute of
5. Cardamo Appangala-2 Karnataka & Kerala. SPices
m rNHY 35) Research, Calicut, Kerala
6. Turmeric IISR PRAGATI Kerala, Tamil Nadu, ICAR-IISR, Kozhikode, Kerala
Andhra
Pradesh,
Telanagana, Karnataka,
and Chhattisgarh
7. Fennel Ajmer Fennel -2 All Fennel growing areas ICAR - National Research Centre
(AF-2) of India. onb Seed Spices, Tabiji, Ajmer
(Rajasthan) _
8 Rlack Panniyur 9 Kerala, Kamataka and Kerala Agricultural UniversitY
Pepper (CuI.5308) Andhra Pradesh
9 Ginger Mohini (UBKV Kerala, Odisha, Himachal AICRP on Spices, Pundibari
AADA-l) Pradesh and West Bengal. Centre
10 Tomato Improve Bhagya Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Nuziveedu Seeds Ltd.,
Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Hyderabad.
Pradesh, Maharashtra and
Goa.
il
Tomato KTH-304 (Kaveri Punlab, Uttar Pradesh, Kaveri Seed Company Limited,
a Hybrid Tomato Hybrid- Bihar and Jharkhand Secunderabad, Telangana.
1 304)
t2 Okra Gujarat Junaladh Ralasthan, Gujarat, Director of Research, Junagadh
Hybrid Okra Hybrid-4 Haryana and Delhi Agricultural University, Junagadh
t3 Tomato Kashi Amul Karnataka, Tamil Nadu Indian Institute of Vegetable
(vRT- 1202\ and Kerala Research (IIVR), Varanasi
Table-3: Details of the variety (Central Variety) to be processed on file as the proposal
has tleen submitted to the committee after-a gap of 6 years from the date of
recommendations and also Packages of Practicer, Glorry coloured photographs in A-4
size and DNA finger printing profile are not provided.
tI ,@"
rs"r.rzo
I I p*r;: ;ffi.,
j Huryunu. Bihar, N.*;;rhi'"
I I rARj,
I I I lRajasthan. I I
Gujarat,
I I I lMadhya pradesh. I I
I
I
Table-4: Detail of the varieties (Central Varieties) which were deferred by the Sub_
Committee due to the reason indicated against each of the proposal in the remarks
column.
st. Crop Variety State Sponsoring Remarks
No
Authority
Azad
1 Ash Gourd Petha-l Karnataka, Department of Subject to furnishing
(KAG-l Tamil of
) Nadu Vegetable PoP and DNA
Science,
and Kerala C.S. finger profile.
Azad University
of Agri.&
Tech.,
Kanpur.
2 Cardamom IISR (Avinash) Karnataka & ICAR- IISR. Subject to furnishing
Kerala Calicut, Kerala of DNA finger
printing profile.
3 Turmeric Narendra Haldi- All Turmeric NDUA&T, Subject to fumishing
98 G\rDH-98) growing areas Faizabad. of PoP, DNA finger
in India printing profile' and
NBPGR
accession
certificate
No.4:
Item Proposals received for consideration of notification-State Release during
the 25th meeting of Central Sub Committee on Crop
Standards,
Notification and Release of Varieties for Horticultural Crops.
The following proposals fbr notification received fiom various states were considered
by llt 25th meeting of Sub-Committee and the Committee recommended the proposals for
notification as per details given as under:
Table-S: Detail of the varieties (State Varieties) approved by the Committee
SL Crop Variety State Sponsoring Authority
No
Dil Seed Gujarat Anand Gujarat Main Vegetable Research Station, Anan
1
Vegetable Dil Agricultural University, Anand
Seed I (GAVD l)
Gujarat
2. Garlic Anand Gujarat Main Vegetable Research Station, Anan
Garlic 6 (GAG 6) Agricultural University, Anand
J a . Garlic Gujarat Junagadh Gujarat Junagadh Agricultural University,
Garlic-5 (GJG-5) Junagadh
4. Onion Gujarat Junagadh Gujarat Junagadh Agricultural University,
White
Onion-3. Junagadh
(GJWO-3)
5. Onion Gujarat Anand Gujarat Main Vegetable Research Station
White Onion 2 Anand Agricultural University, Anand
(GAWO 2)
6. Brinjal Gujarat Junagadh Gujarat Vegetable Research Station, Junagadh
Brinial-3 (GJB-3) Agricultural University, Junagadh
7. Brinjal Gujarat Anand Gujarat Main Vegetable Research Station
Brinjal
Hybrid-3 Anand Agricultural University
(GABH 3)
8. Turmeric GNT-2 (NVST- Gujarat Navsari Agril. University, Navasari,
64) Gujarat.
The remaining proposals which were deferred by the Sub-Committee with their
remarks are as under:-
Table-6: Detail of the varieties (State Varieties) deferred by the Sub-Committee.
Remarks
Authori
Shalimar Jammu Sher-e-Kashmir Subject to furnishing DNA finger
Methi-l Kashmir University of printing profile.
Agricultural
Sciences &,
Technology of
Kashmir, Sri
Coriander Shalimar Jammu Sher-e-Kashmir Subject to furnishing DNA finger
Dhania-1 Kashmir University of printing profile.
Agricultural
Sciences &
Technology of
Kashmir, Srinagar.
Winged Chhattisgarh Chhattisgarh IGKV, Raipur (CG) The sponsoring Authority has not
Bean Chaudhari submitted data relating to green
Sem-2 pod yield rather seed yield,
therefore, the proposal may be
resubmitted with the
desired
information along with
E PoP,
Coloured glossy Photo and
a
{
also a copy of minutes of the
O State Seed Sub-Committee.
SD
Cowpea Gujarat Gujarat Agricultural Subject to furnishing clarification
Dantiwada University, whether this variety is meant for
Vegetable Sardarkrushi-nagar vegetable purpose or for seed and
Cowpea-2 furnishing of PoP and Coloured
(GDVC-2) glossy photographs.
5. Cowpea Gujarat Gujarat S.D. Agricultural The proposal submitted is for
Cowpea-6 University, Sardar pulse type and not for green pod
(GC 6) krushinagar, as vegetable purpose. Therefore,
Gujarat-385506 the sponsoring Authority should
clarify the same and resubmit
along with PoP and Coloured
slossy photographs.
6. Garlic Phule Nilima Maharashtra MPKV, Rahuri Proposal is unsigned by the co-
(Sel. 10-3) convener meant for notification
and also not accompanied with a
copy of the minutes of the sub-
committee and Subject to
furnishing of DNA finger printing
profile, PoP, A-4 size glossy
coloured photographs
and
NBPGR accession Certificate.
7. Brinjal Gujarat Gujarat Navsari Agril. Subject to furnishing of DNA
Navsari University, Navsari finger printing profile.
Round (Gujarat)
Brinjal-l
(GNRB-1)
8. Brinjal Chhattisgarh Chhattisgarh IGKV, Raipur(CG) The Sponsoring Authority has
submitted DNA Finger Profile
Safed
Baigan-1 using RAPD markers, however, it
is advised that instead of RAPD
marker, the DNA finger Profiie
should be based on robust SS
markers which are reproducible.
9. Mango Phule Maharashtra National Subject to furnishing of PoP, ,A'4
(Pickle Abhiruchi Agricultural size coloured glossy photograPhs
Tvpe) (Selection Research Project, and NBPGR NBPGR Accession
with the
Certificate NAGS
GK-PM-s) Ganeshkhand, Pune
(MS) collection.
to of
10. Cluster Phule Guar Maharashtra MPKV, Rahuri Subject furnishing PoP,
DNA finger printing Profile, ,A4
bean
size coloured glossy photograPhs
and NBPGR Certificate.
ll Okra Phule Maharashtra MPKV. Rahuri Subject to furnishing of the proof
Vimukta that the variety under reference in
resistant YMV and also A4 size
coloured glossy photograPhs.
-,
12. Fig Phule Maharashtra MPKV, Rahuri Subject to furnishing of h
.
sample has deposited o1
Rajewadi
and DNA finger printing
(Selection Pr.
and A4 size coloured glos
JWF-6)
photographs.
13. Lettuce Phule Padma Maharashtra MPKV, Rahuri Subject to furnishing of DNA'
(GKL-2) finger printing profile and A.4 size
coloured glossy photograPhs,
NBPGR Certificate and a coPY of
the minutes of the sub-committee.
14. Custard Phule Maharashtra MPKV, Rahuri Subject to furnishing of coloured
photographs of fruits, DNA finger
Apple Purandar
(Jwc-1) printing profile and copy of the
minutes of the sub-committee.
15. Turmeric Punjab Punjab PAU, Ludhiana Subject to furnishing of PoP,'A4
Haldi-1 size coloured' glossy photographs,
a copy of the minutes of the sub-
committee and no signature of the
io-convener of the sub-
committee.
16. Turmeric Punjab Punjab PAU, Ludhiana Subject to furnishing of PoP, ,A'4
Haldi-2 size coloured glossy photograph,
a copy of the minutes of the sub-
committee and no signature of the
of the
co-convener sub-
committee.
17. Turmeric GN Gujarat Navsari Agril. Subject to furnishing NBPGR
Turmeric- University, accession Certificate.
1(GNT-1) Navasari, Guiarat.
18. Bottle Punjab Punjab PAU, Ludhiana Subject to furnishing of a
guard Barkat clarification that the vegetative
growth is high as compared to the
fruits stage and also there is
variation in the size of bottle
guard, DNA finger printing
profile, PoP and a copy of the
minutes of the sub-committee are
missing..
19. Coriander Chhattisgarh Chhattisgarh IGKV, Raipur. Subject to furnishing copy of the
Dhaniya-1 minutes of sub-committee, PoP,
clear DNA finger printing profile
and A-4 size coloured glossy
photographs.
S.D.
20. Ajwain Gujarat Gujarat Agricultural Subject to furnishing DNA finger
Ajwain-2 University, printing profile and A-4 size
(JA- l0) Sardarkrushinagar, coloured glossy photographs and
1
Gujarat a copy of the minutes of the sub-
committee.
2l Dolichos Chhattisgarh Chhattisgarh IGKV, Raipur (CG) The sponsoring Authority has
Bean Sem-l submitted DNA Finger Profile
W (lndian usins RAPD markers. The
Committee desired that instead of
)
RAPD marker, the DNA finger
profile should be furnished based
on robust SS markers which are
/
reproducible.
22. Celery Punjab Punjab Punjab Agricultural Subject to furnishing of DNA
Celery I University, finger printing profile.
(PAU 5) Ludhiana.
Acid Lime Ganganagar Rajasthan ARS, SK Rajasthan Subject to fumishing of DNA
I-ime-1 Agricultural finger printing profile.
University,
Sriganganagar.
24. Cauliflower Pusa Delhi NCR IARI, RS, Katrain, Subject to furnishing of NBPGR
Snowball Kullu (HP) accession Certiflcate, DNA finger
Hybrid-l printing profile and copy of the
(KrH-27) minutes of the state seed sub-
committee.
Besides, some of the proposals relating to different crops which were not considered by the
committee due to non-availability of Seed Certification Standards are as under:-
Table-7: Details of the varieties which were not considered due to non-availability of
Seed Certification Standards
sl. Crop Variety State Sponsoring Remarks
Authoritv
No
IGKV,
Spine Gourd Chhattisgarh Chhattisgarh Raipur The seed standard for this
1
Kankoda-2 (CG) crop is not available so it
(Ambika l2-1) is not possible to notify the
croo/senera.
2 Manila PKM (Mr) I Tamil Nadu TNAU, Seed certification
Tamarind (rD-l) Coimbatore. standards for this crop are
not available, therefore
couldn't be considered for
notification
J a Rajgira I Chhattisgarh Chhattisgarh IGKV, Raipur. This is not meant for green
Amaranth Rajgira I Amaranths, rather it is for
(Ambika GA grain purpose and doesn't
12-t) come under the purview of
horticultural crops.
IARI Seed
4 Kale Central Kale Himachal Regional; certification
Pusa 64 Pradesh, Station, Katrain, standards for this crop are
(KTK-64) Jammu & Kullu Valley, HP. not available, therefore
Kashmir and couldn't be considered for
Uttarakhand notification
Table-8: Details of the varieties rejected by the Sub-Committee due to the reasons as
stated in the remarks column.
sl. Crop Variety State Sponsoring Remarks
Authoritv
No
:-
t\
Turmeric Chhattisgarh Chhattisgarh IGKV, Raipur Rejected clue
1 facts that the ProP\
Haldi-1
submi,,\
has not been
with
seriousness'
without verifying the
vital
information
including
qualitY
coloured photographs.
2. ?umpkin Puniab Samrat Puniab PAU, Ludhiana R pr e op je o c sa te ls d h a a s v e n th o e t
J. Cucumber Punjab Punjab PAU, Ludhiana
been accompanied bY
Naveen (Sel-
copy of the minutes of
97-7)
seed sub committe,
4. Coriander Punjab Punjab PAU, Ludhiana without
coloured
Sugandh
photographs, DNA
5. Garden Pea Punjab-89 Punjab PAU, Ludhiana finger
Printing
(PC-s31)
profiles, PoP, without
signature of co-
convener
and
proposals submitted
very late after a gaP of
l0 years and data
pertains to the
Year
2006-07
\ Bhu Central Tuber May resubmit in
6. Sweet Potato (sr Swami Odisha Crops Research revised proformae,
10)
Institute, after completing the
necessary formalities
Sreekariyam,
Trivendrum. like PoP, DNA Finger
Central Tuber Profile, NBPGR
7. Sweet Potato Bhu Sona (ST Odisha
r4) Crops Research Accession certificate
Institute, and also a copy of the
Sreekariyam, minutes of the State
seed
Trivendrum. sub-committee
and also with latest
8. Sweet Potato Bhu Kanti Odisha ICAR Central data.
Tuber
(srP440127) CroPs
Research Institute,
Sreekariyam,
Trivendrum.
9. Sweet Potato Bhu Krishna Odisha ICAR Central
Tuber
(sr CroPs
13)
Research lnstitute,
Sreekariyam,
Trivendrum.
gnu ICAR
10. Sweet Potato I Ja Odisha Central
Tuber
tctpswn-z) CroPs
I
Research Institute,
Sreekariyam,
Trivendrum.
Bhu
Taro Kripa Odisha ICAR Central
(Jhankari) Tuber
Crops
Research Institute,
Sreekariyam,
Trivendrum
12. Taro Bhu Sree Odisha ICAR Central
(Sonajuli) Tuber
Crops
Research Institute,
Sreekariyam,
Trivendrum
13. Greater Yam Bhu Swar (Da- Odisha ICAR Central
2s) Tuber
Crops
Research Institute.
Sreekariyam,
Trivendrum.
The representative of the Anand Agriculture University expressed concemed for not
considering the proposals relating to aromatic and medicinal plants due to non-availability of
seed certification standards, a mandatory requirements for notification of crop under section
5 of the Seeds Act, 1966. Therefore, the Committee desired there are many crops / genera for
which seed certification standards are not available for example Kale, Spine Gourd, Manila
Tamarind and Makhana. The Member Secretary informed the house that a committee under
the Chairmanship of Dr. S.K. Malhotra, Agriculture Commissioner has already been working
to finalize the seed certification standards for various left out crops relating to seed spices,
rhizome spices, tree and fruits, plantation crops, aromatic and medicinal plants.
Dr. A.K. Singh, DDG (Hort.) ICAR and Chairman of the Committee also mentioned
that DNA Finger Printing profile should be based on robust SS Markers which should be
reproducible and not varies from lab to lab for the same seed lot and the RAPD based DNA
Finger Profile will not be accepted. Further, he was of the view, that this relaxation may be
possible only for tree fruits.
Dr. T. Jankiram, ADG (HS). ICAR referred to the decisions taken in the previous 24th
Meeting of Sub-committee on Crop Standards Notification and Release of varieties for
Horticultural Crops held on 22nd September, 2016 under the Chairmanship of Dr. A.K. Singh,
DDG (Agri. Extn. & In-charge Hort.), ICAR, wherein, it was decided that:
(i)
DNA finger printing should be made as per the NBPGR standard guidelines and
protocols and submitted along with the release proposal to the Committee.
€
i
(ii) The sponsoring authorities should authenticate the source of parental material used
the proposed variety to ensure the legitimacy of the parental material' in case the
material is taken from elsewhere/farmers'
(iii) Proposals identified for release through AICRP or state seed sub- committee should
be submitted within a period of two years only for notification'
Accordingly, the State Governments/ SAUs / ICAR Institutes and Private Seed
companies are advised to strictly adhere to the above decisions and submit the proposal for
notification within a period of two years from the date of the meeting of the sub-committee'
Deputy Commissioner (Quality Control) and Member Secretary of the Sub-
committee mentioned that Department of Agriculture, cooperation and Farmers welfare has
advised all the Public sector Seed corporations/Seed companies, ICAR Institutes and SAUs
to disclose the expected performance of the variety under reference along with package of
practices and accession certificate from NBPGR / NAGS for deposit of seed / planting
material. Therefbre, all breeders/sponsoring institutions are advised to provide variety wise
package of practice along with the ReleaseAJotification proposals to be submitted to the Sub-
Committee. The submission of details of characteristics of variety/hybrid with parent lines,
package of practices for cultivation of variety, NBPGR Accession certificate, coloured
photographs in 44 size, DNA finger profile with a copy of minutes of the meeting when it
was considered along a copy of the proposal for ReleaseA'{otification as the case may be
would not be considered. Further, the Committee desired that, the specific action should be
taken on deferred proposals of previous meetings in consultation with the concerned
Breeder/PC/PD and after completing various deficiencies the same may be included in the
Agenda for this meeting.
It was also decided that in future Seeds Division will also require the detailed
information of Release and Notification proposals in the electronic form (digital) with hard
copy. In case any breeder/company/institute fails to submit the soft copy of proposal either
through mail or CD, the proposal will not be considered. This has been made mandatory as
all the details of characteristics of the variety recommended for release and notification are
required by the Seed Certification Agencies for field certification/inspection. Digitalized
information will make it easier for the Secretariat to complete the requisite information
w
within a reasonable time. A specified proforma as per Annexure-ll seeking the required
information in the electronic form be submitted to the Secretariat of CSC on email. qccsc-
agri@gov.in' The Chairman desired the meeting of Horticulture Comm,ittee should be
convened at least twice in a year to clear the backlog. The Member Secretary has informed
that all the proposals which were received in the Seeds Division on the date of the meeting
were considered in the present meeting and there was no proposal left as on date.
The meeting ended with a vote of thanks to the chair.
f,
Annexure-l.
c L r is o t p o s f t p a a n r d t a ic r i d p s a , n t N s o w tif h ic o a a ti t o te n n a d n ed d t R h e e l e 2 & 5f s t e M o e f e v tin a g iie o ti f e t s h e fo c r e H n o tr r a ti l c s u u lt b u - r G al o m cr m o i p tt s e e h e o ld n
under the Ghairmanship of Dr. A.K. singh, Deputy Director Genera! (Horticutture),
IGAR at 2.30 P.M. on 18th September, 2017 in Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan-l!, pusa,
New Delhi-110012.
1'
P Bh I a ' w n a x n -ll S , i p n u g s h a , , D N e e p w u D ty e D lh ir i e _ c t C o h r a G ir e m n a e n ra . l (Horticulture), tcAR Krishi Anusandhan
2'
Dr' T' Janakiram, Asstt. Director General (HS), ICAR Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan-ll,
Pusa, New Delhi.
3. Shri D.S. Misra, Deputy Commissioner (QC), DAC&FW, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.
4. Dr. B. singh, Director, rndian rnstitute of vegetabre Research, Varanasi.
5. Dr' S' Rajan, Director, Central lnstitute for Subtropical Horticulture (CISH), Lucknow.
6. Dr. G. Lal, Director, lcAR-National Research centre for seed spices (NRCSS),
Ajmer.
7. Dr' Neema V.P. , Professor & Head, Kerala Agricultural University, Thrissur, Kerala.
8.
Dr. Kalyani srinivasan, principal scientist, NBPGR, pusa, New Delhi_1 10012.
L
Dr. K. Nirmal Babu, lndian lnstitute of spices Research, Kozhikode.
10. Dr. R. Nagarajan Reddy, ICAR-DMAPR, Anand.
11' W Dr lC ' B , . I C V A a R ra - l I a lH k R sh , m B i e , n P ga ri l n u c ru ip . al Scientist (Hort.), Division of Vegetable Crops, tui$,
12.Dr. A.D. Munshi, principarscientist, Vegetabre Science, rARr, New Derhi.
13. shri K.K. Pandey, Deputy Director Horticurture, Raipur, chhattisgarh.
14. shri R. Aravindar, AD.ll, Directorate of Horticulture, chepauk, chennai_S (TN).
15. Dr. V.s. Pandey, Manager (prodn), NSC Ltd., pusa, New Derhi-1 1oo1z.
16' shri Radhey shyam, Deputy Manager (prodn.), NSC Ltd., pusa, New Derhi-1 10012.
17. shri Dharam singh, Uttarakhand state seed certification Agency, Dehradun.
18- Shri Lekh Raj Sharma, DEO, DAC&FW.
19. Miss Abhilasha, DEO, DAC&FW.
20. ShriVirendra Kumar, MTs.